The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends that diabetes screening for most adults begin at age 35. The ADA advises diabetes screening before age 35 if you're overweight and have additional risk factors for prediabetes or type 2 diabetes.
If you've had gestational diabetes, your health care provider will likely check your blood sugar levels at least once every three years.
There are several blood tests for prediabetes.
This test indicates your average blood sugar level for the past 2 to 3 months.
Certain conditions can make the A1C test inaccurate — such as if you're pregnant or have an uncommon form of hemoglobin.
A blood sample is taken after you haven't eaten for at least eight hours or overnight (fast).
Blood sugar values are expressed in milligrams of sugar per deciliter (mg/dL) or millimoles of sugar per liter (mmol/L) of blood. In general:
This test is less commonly used than the others, except during pregnancy. You'll need to fast overnight and then drink a sugary liquid at the primary care provider's office or lab testing site. Blood sugar levels are tested periodically for the next two hours.
If you have prediabetes, your health care provider will typically check your blood sugar levels at least once a year.
Type 2 diabetes is becoming more common in children and adolescents, likely due to the rise in childhood obesity.
The ADA recommends prediabetes testing for children who are overweight or obese and who have one or more other risk factors for type 2 diabetes, such as:
The ranges of blood sugar level considered normal, prediabetes and diabetes are the same for children and adults.
Children who have prediabetes should be tested annually for type 2 diabetes — or more often if the child experiences a change in weight or develops signs or symptoms of diabetes, such as increased thirst, increased urination, fatigue or blurred vision.
Healthy lifestyle choices can help you bring your blood sugar level back to normal, or at least keep it from rising toward the levels seen in type 2 diabetes.
To prevent prediabetes from progressing to type 2 diabetes, try to:
Children with prediabetes should follow the lifestyle changes recommended for adults with type 2 diabetes, including:
Medication generally isn't recommended for children with prediabetes unless lifestyle changes aren't improving blood sugar levels. If medication is needed, metformin is usually the recommended drug.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Many alternative therapies have been touted as possible ways to treat or prevent type 2 diabetes. But there's no definitive evidence that any alternative treatments are effective. Therapies that have been said to be helpful in type 2 diabetes and are also likely to be safe, include:
Talk to your health care provider if you're considering dietary supplements or other alternative therapies to treat or prevent prediabetes. Some supplements or alternative therapies might be harmful if combined with certain prescription medications. Your health care provider can help you weigh the pros and cons of specific alternative therapies.
You're likely to start by seeing your primary care provider. He or she may refer you to a specialist in diabetes treatment (endocrinologist), a dietitian or a certified diabetes educator.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Before your appointment, take these steps:
Your health care provider is likely to ask you a number of questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.