Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Parenting, Kids & Teens / Explaining period parties — and how they might help your child
A period party — sometimes called a "first moon party" or a "menstruation celebration" — is a way to commemorate a child's first period.
If you’re a woman, or any person with female anatomy, you likely remember the first time you got your period. Whether you were excited, bummed out or horrified, it was probably an event that made an impression.
For me, the memory is crystal clear. It was Easter Sunday, and the whole family was at my grandma’s house for brunch. I was 11 years old and wearing my favorite jeans: white denim with yellow and purple stripes.
But then, I went to the bathroom and realized there was black stuff all over my underwear AND my awesome jeans. I called for my mom. Mom called for Grandma. Together, they confirmed it. I had my period. There was whispering among the aunties, and suddenly all the men and cousins were sent outside to play baseball.
Then, all the ladies in my family fussed over me. I got extra cake and fudge. Grandma washed out my jeans and dried them with the hairdryer. They told me funny stories about periods and gave me tips. Decades before period parties were invented, I was lucky enough to have one.
A period party — sometimes called a “first moon party” or a “menstruation celebration” — is a way to commemorate a child’s first period.
While it might seem a little awkward to have a biological-function-themed party, period parties turn a stigma into a celebration. Getting your first period can feel scary or embarrassing. The party is a way to help a young adult feel comfortable — and even empowered — by the changes that puberty brings.
The first rule of period parties: The child decides who to invite. If they only want close family, that’s great. If they want a girls-only affair, it’s their call. If they don’t want anything at all, that’s OK, too.
After polling my friends with teens and preteens, I found out about three variations of period parties:
If you’re inviting kids outside of your family or household, it’s best to tell attendees’ parents or guardians that it’s a period party in advance. Parents who are unfamiliar with period parties might have questions or reservations.
Again, it’s important that everything at a period party is OK’d by the guest of honor. That said, ideas for period parties are all over the internet.
With a quick search on Pinterest, you’ll see all sorts of period-related decoration ideas. You can even buy period decorating kits online. The defining feature of most of these decorations is the color red. In fact, many period parties have all-red menus, with foods like strawberries, watermelons, red fondue and red soft drinks.
There is also a surprising number of appropriate menstruation songs on YouTube for a period playlist. Just be sure to screen the videos before you play them. You might have the kids rate them on awkwardness, funniness or other factors.
So, what, exactly, do you do at a first period party? Pretty much the same thing you do at other kids’ parties — only with a period theme.
If your child is one of the first in their group to get their period, a period party also can be an opportunity to share some knowledge.
With any luck, you’ll help your newly minted menstruator and their buddies become comfortable and confident women.
This inviting chapter book series explores health topics through the friendly lens of therapy dogs. Follow an adorable therapy dog helping a child who broke her arm, with strong messages of empathy, kindness, and courage. Therapy dogs are specially trained to help kids through medical experiences—from lifting spirits, motivating movement,…
Discover more Parenting, Kids & Teens content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
Want more children’s health and parenting information? Sign up for free to our email list.
Children’s health information and parenting tips to your inbox.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.