Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Brush your teeth twice a day with fluoride toothpaste for at least two minutes each time you brush. This recommendation is from the American Dental Association.
When you brush, you help take food and plaque off your teeth. Plaque is a sticky white film that forms on teeth. Plaque has bacteria in it. After you eat a meal or snack that has sugar, the bacteria in plaque make acids that attack tooth enamel. Enamel is the hard outer coating that covers your teeth.
Over time, the acid breaks down tooth enamel. That can lead to cavities. And plaque that stays on teeth hardens into tartar. When there's tartar on your teeth, it's harder to keep them clean. Tartar buildup on the gums also leads to inflammation that causes gum disease.
To protect your teeth, don't brush them right after having food or drinks that contain a lot of acids. Examples include soft drinks, such as soda and sports drinks, sour candies, citrus juices and citrus fruits. The acid in them can soften the enamel. Brushing too soon after you eat or drink something acidic can take the enamel off your teeth. Wait an hour to brush. During that time, your saliva washes away the acid and the enamel hardens again.
If you have arthritis, if you have a hard time holding a toothbrush or if you have braces, try an electric or battery-operated toothbrush. Those toothbrushes may be easier to use.
Along with brushing your teeth twice a day, follow these steps to help keep your mouth healthy:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.