Your healthcare professional does a physical exam and asks about your symptoms and medical history. You might have a breast ultrasound. Your healthcare professional might take out, called aspirate, some of the fluid in your breast. A culture of this fluid can help find the best antibiotic for you.
A rare form of breast cancer, called inflammatory breast cancer, also can cause redness and swelling that might be confused with mastitis. Your healthcare professional may suggest a mammogram or an ultrasound or both.
If your symptoms don't go away after you take a full course of antibiotics, you may need a biopsy to make sure you don't have breast cancer. Be sure to follow up with your healthcare professional after you've taken all the antibiotics.
It's safe to keep breastfeeding if you have mastitis. Breastfeeding helps clear the infection. Weaning your baby suddenly might make your symptoms worse.
You might see a specialist in breastfeeding, called a lactation consultant, for help and support. Advice on the best way to breastfeed might include:
Breast-feeding can be awkward at first. Experiment with various positions until you feel comfortable.
The cross-cradle hold is ideal for early breast-feeding. Sit up straight in a comfortable chair with armrests. Bring your baby across the front of your body, tummy to tummy. Hold your baby in the crook of the arm opposite the breast you're feeding from — left arm for right breast, right arm for left. Support the back of the baby's head with your open hand. With the other hand, support your breast from the underside in a U-shaped hold. Guide the baby's mouth to your breast. Don't bend over or lean forward. Instead, cradle your baby close to your breast.
The cradle hold is similar to the cross-cradle hold, but you support the baby with the arm on the same side as the nursing breast, rather than the opposite arm. As with the cross-cradle hold, sit up straight — preferably in a chair with armrests. Cradle your baby in an arm, with your baby's head resting comfortably in the crook of your elbow while he or she faces your breast. For extra support, place a pillow on your lap.
Another option is the football hold. This position might be a good choice if you're recovering from a C-section or you have large breasts.
Hold your baby beside you, with your elbow bent. With your open hand, support your baby's head and face him or her toward your breast. Your baby's back will rest on your forearm. It might help to support your breast in a C-shaped hold with your other hand. For comfort, put a pillow on your lap and use a chair with broad, low arms.
A lying position might be a good choice when you're tired but able to stay awake — although it's important to return the baby to his or her own bed to sleep.
Lie on your side and face your baby toward your breast, supporting him or her with one hand. With the other hand, grasp your breast and touch your nipple to your baby's lips. Once your baby latches on, use one arm to support your own head and the other to help support the baby and bring him or her close.
If you have twins, you might choose to breast-feed them separately. This can be helpful when you are first starting to breast-feed. Later, if you'd rather breast-feed them at the same time, try the football hold — with one baby in each arm.
Hold each baby at one side, with your elbows bent. Your babies' backs will rest on your forearms. For comfort, put pillows on your lap and use a chair with broad, low arms.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
You may be sent to an obstetrician-gynecologist. For problems related to breastfeeding, you may be referred to a lactation consultant.
Be sure to ask all the questions you have.
Your healthcare professional might ask you:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.