Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Plan ahead and get the medical care you want at the end of life.
Living wills and other advance directives include written, legal instructions that state the treatment you want for medical conditions when you're unable to make decisions for yourself. Advance directives guide choices for healthcare professionals and caregivers in certain situations. For example, a medical team may use advance directives when you're unable to talk and are terminally ill, seriously injured, in a coma, in the late stages of dementia or near the end of life.
Advance directives aren't only for older adults. You can have unexpected accidents, illnesses or end-of-life situations happen at any age. So it's important for all adults to prepare these papers.
By planning ahead, you can get the medical care you want and avoid unnecessary suffering. You also can relieve caregivers of decision-making burdens during times of crisis or grief. And you help lessen confusion or disagreement about the choices you would want people to make on your behalf.
A medical or healthcare power of attorney is a type of advance directive in which you name a person to make healthcare decisions for you when you are unable to do so. In some states this directive also may be called a durable power of attorney for healthcare or a healthcare proxy.
Depending on where you live, the person you choose to make healthcare decisions on your behalf may be called one of the following:
Choosing a person to act as your healthcare agent is important. Even if you have other legal papers about your care, you can't anticipate all situations ahead of time, such as emergencies and illnesses. And in some situations, someone will need to decide about your likely care wishes. Aim to choose a person who:
The person you name may be a spouse, other family member, friend or member of a faith community. You also may choose one or more other people in case the person you chose is unable to fulfill the role.
A living will is a written, legal paper, called a document, that includes details about the medical treatments you would and would not want to be used to keep you alive. It's used when you are unable to decide yourself. It also includes your choices for other medical decisions, such as pain management or organ donation.
In deciding your wishes, think about your values. For example, think about how important it is to you to be independent and self-sufficient. Think about what situations might make you feel like your life is not worth living. Would you want treatment to extend your life in any situation or in all situations? Would you want treatment only if a cure is possible?
You should list many possible end-of-life care decisions in your living will. Talk to your healthcare professional about any questions you may have about the following medical decisions:
You don't need an advance directive or living will to have do not resuscitate (DNR) and do not intubate (DNI) orders. To make DNR or DNI orders, tell your healthcare professional about your preferences. Your healthcare professional will write the orders and put them in your medical record. Keep a copy of these orders at home too.
You may already have a living will that includes your choices about resuscitation and intubation. But it's still a good idea to set up DNR or DNI orders each time you stay at a new hospital or healthcare facility.
Advance directives need to be in writing. Each state has different forms and requirements for filling out legal documents. Depending on where you live, you may need to have the form signed by a witness or notarized. You can ask a lawyer to help you with the process, but you don't generally need a lawyer.
You can find links to state-specific forms on the websites of many organizations such as the American Bar Association, AARP, and the National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization.
Look over your advance directives with your healthcare professional and your healthcare agent to be sure you have filled out forms correctly. When you have finished your documents:
You can change your directives at any time. If you want to make changes, you must fill out a new form. Give new copies to your healthcare professional and others, and get rid of all old copies. Specific requirements for changing directives may vary by state.
You should talk with your primary healthcare professional about any changes. Make sure a new directive replaces an old directive in your medical file. New directives also must be added to medical charts in a hospital or nursing home. Also, talk to your healthcare agent, family and friends about changes you have made.
Think about checking your directives and filling out new ones in the following situations:
In some states, advance healthcare planning includes a document called physician orders for life-sustaining treatment (POLST). This document also may be called provider orders for life-sustaining treatment (POLST) or medical orders for life-sustaining treatment (MOLST).
A POLST is meant for people who are diagnosed with a serious illness. This form doesn't replace your other directives. Instead, it serves as healthcare professional-ordered instructions — not unlike a prescription. A POLST ensures that, in case of an emergency, you get the treatment you prefer. Your healthcare professional will fill out the form. To fill out the form, your healthcare professional will use the information in your advance directives, the talks you have with your healthcare professional about the likely course of your illness and your treatment preferences.
A POLST stays with you. If you are in a hospital or nursing home, staff post the POLST near your bed. If you are living at home or in a hospice care facility, staff clearly place the POLST where emergency staff or other medical team members can easily find it.
Forms vary by state, but a POLST lets your healthcare professional include details about your care. These details can include what treatments a medical team should not use, under what conditions a medical team can use some treatments, how long a medical team may use some treatments and when the medical team should stop treatments. Issues covered in a POLST may include:
A POLST also states what advance directives you have written and who serves as your healthcare power of attorney. Like advance directives, you can cancel or update POLSTs.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.