Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Most of the time, there's no known cause for night leg cramps. In general, they're likely the result of tired muscles and nerve problems.
The risk of having night leg cramps increases with age. Pregnant people also are more likely to have night leg cramps.
Kidney failure, diabetic nerve damage and problems with blood flow are known to cause night leg cramps. But if you have one of these conditions, you probably already know. And you likely have symptoms other than just night leg cramps.
People who take medicines that increase urine output might be more likely to have night leg cramps. But it's not known if there's a direct link.
Restless legs syndrome is sometimes confused with night leg cramps. But the conditions are different. The most common symptom of restless legs syndrome is the need to move the legs when falling asleep. Restless legs syndrome is usually not painful, and the symptoms last longer than do night leg cramps.
Other health issues that can sometimes be linked to night leg cramps include:
Causes shown here are commonly associated with this symptom. Work with your doctor or other health care professional for an accurate diagnosis.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.