Polymyalgia rheumatica is an inflammatory condition. It causes joint and muscle pain and stiffness, mainly in the shoulders and hips. Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica (pol-e-my-AL-juh rue-MAT-ih-kuh) may begin quickly or come on over several days to weeks. Symptoms are most often worse in the morning.
Most people who get polymyalgia rheumatica are older than 65. It rarely affects people younger than 50.
This condition is related to another inflammatory condition called giant cell arteritis. Giant cell arteritis can cause headaches, vision troubles, jaw pain and scalp tenderness. Some people have polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis.
The symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica most often affect both sides of the body. They might include:
See your healthcare professional if you have aches, pains or stiffness that:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Experts don't know the cause of polymyalgia rheumatica. But genes may be part of the cause. Certain genes and gene changes might raise the risk of polymyalgia rheumatica.
Researchers are studying other causes of the condition.
Polymyalgia rheumatica and another condition known as giant cell arteritis are alike in many ways. Many people who have one of these conditions also have symptoms of the other.
Giant cell arteritis causes swelling and irritation, also called inflammation, in the lining of blood vessels called arteries. This inflammation often affects the arteries in the temples. But it also can affect other medium and large blood vessels, such as those to the heart.
Symptoms include headaches, jaw pain, trouble seeing and scalp tenderness. Sometimes, fever and weight loss may be the first symptoms. If not treated, polymyalgia rheumatica can lead to a stroke or blindness.
Risk factors for polymyalgia rheumatica include:
Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica can make it hard to do daily activities, such as:
These complications can affect your health, social life, physical activity, sleep and well-being.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.