Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Many factors can cause leg swelling. Some factors are more serious than others.
Leg swelling caused by fluid buildup in leg tissues is known as peripheral edema. It can be caused by a problem with how blood travels through the body. It also can be caused by a problem with the lymphatic system or the kidneys.
Leg swelling isn't always a sign of a heart or circulation problem. You can have swelling due to fluid buildup from being overweight, being inactive, sitting or standing for a long time, or wearing tight stockings or jeans.
Factors related to fluid buildup include:
Leg swelling also can be caused by inflammation in leg joints or tissues. Swelling can be a response to injury or disease. It also may be the result of rheumatoid arthritis or another inflammatory disorder. You'll likely feel pain with inflammatory disorders.
Conditions that can cause inflammation in the leg include:
Causes shown here are commonly associated with this symptom. Work with your doctor or other health care professional for an accurate diagnosis.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.