During a kidney biopsy, your doctor uses a needle to remove a small sample of kidney tissue for lab testing. The biopsy needle is inserted through your skin and is often directed using the guidance of an imaging device, such as ultrasound.
During a kidney biopsy, your doctor uses a needle to remove a small sample of kidney tissue for lab testing. The biopsy needle is inserted through your skin and is often directed using the guidance of an imaging device, such as ultrasound.
To diagnose end-stage renal disease, your health care provider may ask you about your family's and your medical history. You may also have physical and neurological exams, along with other tests such as:
Certain tests might be repeated over time to help your provider follow the progress of your kidney disease.
There are five stages of kidney disease. To determine what stage you have, your health care provider performs a blood test to check your glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The GFR measures how much blood the kidneys filter each minute, recorded as milliliters per minute (mL/min). As the GFR declines, so does your kidney function.
When your kidneys no longer work at a level that's necessary to keep you alive, you have end-stage renal disease. End-stage renal disease usually occurs when kidney function is less than 15% of typical kidney function.
As a part of kidney disease staging, your provider also might test whether you have protein in your urine.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your end-stage renal disease-related health concerns
					Start Here


End-stage renal disease treatments include:
During kidney transplant surgery, the donor kidney is placed in your lower abdomen. Blood vessels of the new kidney are attached to blood vessels in the lower part of your abdomen, just above one of your legs. The new kidney's urine tube (ureter) is connected to your bladder. Unless they are causing complications, your own kidneys are left in place.
During kidney transplant surgery, the donor kidney is placed in your lower abdomen. Blood vessels of the new kidney are attached to blood vessels in the lower part of your abdomen, just above one of your legs. The new kidney's urine tube (ureter) is connected to your bladder. Unless they are causing complications, your own kidneys are left in place.
A kidney transplant is a surgical procedure to place a healthy kidney from a live or deceased donor into a person whose kidneys no longer function properly. A kidney transplant is often the treatment of choice for end-stage renal disease, compared with a lifetime on dialysis.
The kidney transplant process takes time. It involves finding a donor, living or deceased, whose kidney best matches your own. You then have surgery to place the new kidney in your lower abdomen and attach the blood vessels and ureter — the tube that links the kidney to the bladder — that will allow the new kidney to function.
You may need to spend several days to a week in the hospital. After leaving the hospital, you can expect frequent checkups to monitor your progress as your recovery continues. You may take a number of medications to help keep your immune system from rejecting your new kidney and to reduce the risk of post-surgery complications, such as infection.
After a successful kidney transplant, your new kidney filters your blood, and you no longer need dialysis.
Dialysis does some of the work of your kidneys when your kidneys can't do it themselves. This includes removing extra fluids and waste products from your blood, restoring electrolyte levels, and helping control your blood pressure.
Dialysis options include peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis.
During peritoneal dialysis, blood vessels in your abdominal lining (peritoneum) fill in for your kidneys with the help of a fluid that washes in and out of the peritoneal space. Peritoneal dialysis is done in your home.
This name refers to the lining that surrounds the organs in your abdomen. That lining is called the peritoneal membrane. It forms a space that can hold fluid. With peritoneal dialysis, a permanent catheter is inserted through the lining into the space around your organs. Dialysis solution is drained through the catheter into that space. The peritoneal lining contains many blood vessels. The solution draws extra fluid, chemicals, and waste out of those blood vessels and through the lining. The lining acts as a filter. The solution is left in place for a number of hours while dialysis occurs. Then it's allowed to drain out through the catheter. New, clean solution is immediately drained in, filling up the space again. This process of exchanging old solution with new is called an exchange.
During hemodialysis, a machine does some of the work of the kidneys by filtering harmful wastes, salts and fluid from your blood. Hemodialysis may be done at a center or in your home.
Your blood is run through a filter that acts as an artificial kidney. The filter removes the extra fluid, chemicals, and waste from your blood. The cleaned blood is then pumped back into your body. Two needles are inserted for every treatment. The place they are inserted is called the access. A surgeon may connect two of your blood vessels to create an access. This is called a fistula. Connecting the vessels causes the vein to get larger and stronger. The dialysis needles are inserted into that vein.
Another option is to connect a plastic tube between two blood vessels. This is called a graft. The needles are inserted into this artificial vein. In urgent situations, a tube, called a catheter, may be placed temporarily into a large vein in your neck. The tube has two branches, one to carry blood out of the body and the other to return it. Your physician will make a recommendation based on the condition of your veins and other considerations.
For dialysis to be successful, you may need to make lifestyle changes, such as following certain dietary recommendations.
If you choose not to have a kidney transplant or dialysis, you can choose palliative or supportive care to help you manage your symptoms and feel better. You also can combine palliative care with kidney transplant or dialysis.
Without either dialysis or a transplant, kidney failure progresses, eventually leading to death. Death can occur quickly or take months or years. Supportive care might include management of symptoms, measures to keep you comfortable and end-of-life planning.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
As part of your treatment for kidney disease, your health care provider might recommend that you follow a special diet to help support your kidneys and limit the work they must do. Ask for a referral to a registered dietitian with expertise in kidney disease to learn ways to make your diet easier on your kidneys.
Depending on your situation, kidney function and overall health, your dietitian might recommend that you:
Choose lower potassium foods. Your dietitian might recommend that you choose lower potassium foods at each meal. High-potassium foods include bananas, oranges, potatoes, spinach and tomatoes.
Examples of low-potassium foods include apples, cabbage, carrots, green beans, grapes and strawberries. Be aware that many salt substitutes contain potassium, so you generally should avoid them if you have kidney failure.
Learning you're in kidney failure can come as a shock, even if you've known about your kidney disease for a while. It might be difficult to manage the treatment schedule if you're on dialysis.
For end-stage renal disease, you'll likely continue to see the same health care provider and care team you've been seeing for treatment of chronic kidney disease. If you're not already being cared for by a doctor who specializes in kidney problems (nephrologist), you might be referred to one as your disease progresses.
To get ready for your appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do ahead of time, such as make changes to your diet. Then take note of:
Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember the information you're given.
For end-stage renal disease, some basic questions to ask your provider include:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions you have.
Your provider may ask you questions, such as:

End-stage renal disease care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.