A brain tumor can form in the brain cells (as shown), or it can begin elsewhere and spread to the brain. As the tumor grows, it creates pressure on and changes the function of surrounding brain tissue, which causes signs and symptoms such as headaches, nausea and balance problems.
A brain tumor can form in the brain cells (as shown), or it can begin elsewhere and spread to the brain. As the tumor grows, it creates pressure on and changes the function of surrounding brain tissue, which causes signs and symptoms such as headaches, nausea and balance problems.
A brain tumor is a growth of cells in the brain or near it. Brain tumors can happen in the brain tissue. Brain tumors also can happen near the brain tissue. Nearby locations include nerves, the pituitary gland, the pineal gland, and the membranes that cover the surface of the brain.
Brain tumors can begin in the brain. These are called primary brain tumors. Sometimes, cancer spreads to the brain from other parts of the body. These tumors are secondary brain tumors, also called metastatic brain tumors.
Many different types of primary brain tumors exist. Some brain tumors aren't cancerous. These are called noncancerous brain tumors or benign brain tumors. Noncancerous brain tumors may grow over time and press on the brain tissue. Other brain tumors are brain cancers, also called malignant brain tumors. Brain cancers may grow quickly. The cancer cells can invade and destroy the brain tissue.
Brain tumors range in size from very small to very large. Some brain tumors are found when they are very small because they cause symptoms that you notice right away. Other brain tumors grow very large before they're found. Some parts of the brain are less active than others. If a brain tumor starts in a part of the brain that's less active, it might not cause symptoms right away. The brain tumor size could become quite large before the tumor is detected.
Brain tumor treatment options depend on the type of brain tumor you have, as well as its size and location. Common treatments include surgery and radiation therapy.
There are many types of brain tumors. The type of brain tumor is based on the kind of cells that make up the tumor. Special lab tests on the tumor cells can give information about the cells. Your health care team uses this information to figure out the type of brain tumor.
Some types of brain tumors usually aren't cancerous. These are called noncancerous brain tumors or benign brain tumors. Some types of brain tumors usually are cancerous. These types are called brain cancers or malignant brain tumors. Some brain tumor types can be benign or malignant.
Benign brain tumors tend to be slow-growing brain tumors. Malignant brain tumors tend to be fast-growing brain tumors.
Glioblastoma is a type of cancer that starts in cells called astrocytes that support nerve cells. It can form in the brain or spinal cord.
Glioblastoma is a type of cancer that starts in cells called astrocytes that support nerve cells. It can form in the brain or spinal cord.
Medulloblastoma is a type of brain cancer that starts in the part of the brain called the cerebellum. Medulloblastoma is the most common type of cancerous brain tumor in children.
Medulloblastoma is a type of brain cancer that starts in the part of the brain called the cerebellum. Medulloblastoma is the most common type of cancerous brain tumor in children.
An acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma) is a benign tumor that develops on the balance and hearing nerves leading from the inner ear to the brain. These nerves are twined together to form the vestibulocochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve). The pressure on the nerve from the tumor may cause hearing loss and imbalance.
An acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma) is a benign tumor that develops on the balance and hearing nerves leading from the inner ear to the brain. These nerves are twined together to form the vestibulocochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve). The pressure on the nerve from the tumor may cause hearing loss and imbalance.
The signs and symptoms of a brain tumor depend on the brain tumor's size and location. Symptoms also might depend on how fast the brain tumor is growing, which is also called the tumor grade.
General signs and symptoms caused by brain tumors may include:
Brain tumors that aren't cancerous tend to cause symptoms that develop slowly. Noncancerous brain tumors also are called benign brain tumors. They might cause subtle symptoms that you don't notice at first. The symptoms might get worse over months or years.
Cancerous brain tumors cause symptoms that get worse quickly. Cancerous brain tumors also are called brain cancers or malignant brain tumors. They cause symptoms that come on suddenly. They get worse in a matter of days or weeks.
Headaches are the most common symptom of brain tumors. Headaches happen in about half of people with brain tumors. Headaches can happen if a growing brain tumor presses on healthy cells around it. Or a brain tumor can cause swelling in the brain that increases pressure in the head and leads to a headache.
Headache pain caused by brain tumors is often worse when you wake up in the morning. But it can happen at any time. Some people have headaches that wake them from sleep. Brain tumor headaches tend to cause pain that's worse when coughing or straining. People with brain tumors most often report that the headache feels like a tension headache. Some people say the headache feels like a migraine.
Brain tumors in the back of the head might cause a headache with neck pain. If the brain tumor happens in the front of the head, the headache might feel like eye pain or sinus pain.
Each side of the brain has four lobes. The frontal lobe is important for thinking and for managing voluntary movement or activity. The parietal lobe is involved in body temperature, taste, touch and movement. The occipital lobe is linked to vision. The temporal lobe processes memories, putting them with taste, sound, sight and touch.
Each side of the brain has four lobes. The frontal lobe is important for thinking and for managing voluntary movement or activity. The parietal lobe is involved in body temperature, taste, touch and movement. The occipital lobe is linked to vision. The temporal lobe processes memories, putting them with taste, sound, sight and touch.
The main part of the brain is called the cerebrum. Brain tumors in different parts of the cerebrum might cause different symptoms.
Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.
Brain tumors that start as a growth of cells in the brain are called primary brain tumors. They might start right in the brain or in the tissue nearby. Nearby tissue might include the membranes that cover the brain, called meninges. Brain tumors also can happen in nerves, the pituitary gland and the pineal gland.
Brain tumors happen when cells in or near the brain get changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow quickly and continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle. This makes a lot of extra cells in the brain. The cells can form a growth called a tumor.
It's not clear what causes the DNA changes that lead to brain tumors. For many people with brain tumors, the cause is never known. Sometimes parents pass DNA changes to their children. The changes can increase the risk of having a brain tumor. These hereditary brain tumors are rare. If you have a family history of brain tumors, talk about it with your health care provider. You might consider meeting with a health care provider trained in genetics to understand whether your family history increases your risk of having a brain tumor.
When brain tumors happen in children, they're likely to be primary brain tumors. In adults, brain tumors are more likely to be cancer that started somewhere else and spread to the brain.
Brain metastases happen when cancer begins elsewhere in the body and spreads (metastasizes) to the brain.
Brain metastases happen when cancer begins elsewhere in the body and spreads (metastasizes) to the brain.
Secondary brain tumors happen when cancer starts somewhere else and spreads to the brain. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.
Any cancer can spread to the brain, but common types include:
It's not clear why some cancers spread to the brain and others are more likely to spread to other places.
Secondary brain tumors most often happen in people who have a history of cancer. Rarely, a brain tumor may be the first sign of cancer that began somewhere else in the body.
In adults, secondary brain tumors are far more common than are primary brain tumors.
In most people with primary brain tumors, the cause isn't clear. But doctors have identified some factors that may raise the risk.
Exposure to radiation. People who have been exposed to a strong type of radiation have an increased risk of brain tumor. This strong radiation is called ionizing radiation. The radiation is strong enough to cause DNA changes in the body's cells. The DNA changes can lead to tumors and cancers. Examples of ionizing radiation include radiation therapy used to treat cancer and radiation exposure caused by atomic bombs.
Low-level radiation from everyday objects isn't linked to brain tumors. Low levels of radiation include the energy that comes from cellphones and radio waves. There is no convincing evidence that using cellphones causes brain tumors. But more studies are happening to make sure.
There's no way to prevent brain tumors. If you get a brain tumor, you didn't do anything to cause it.
People with an increased risk of brain tumor might consider screening tests. Screening isn't brain tumor prevention. But screening might help find a brain tumor when it's small and treatment is more likely to be successful.
If you have a family history of brain tumor or inherited syndromes that increase the risk of brain tumor, talk about it with your health care provider. You might consider meeting with a genetic counselor or other health care provider trained in genetics. This person can help you understand your risk and ways to manage it. For example, you might consider brain tumor screening tests. Testing might include an imaging test or a neurological exam to test your vision, hearing, balance, coordination and reflexes.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.