Hemochromatosis can be difficult to diagnose. Early symptoms such as stiff joints and fatigue may be due to conditions other than hemochromatosis.
Many people with the disease don't have any symptoms other than high levels of iron in their blood. Hemochromatosis may be identified because of irregular blood test results after testing is done for other reasons. It also may be revealed when screening family members of people diagnosed with the disease.
The two key tests to detect iron overload are:
These blood tests for iron are best performed after fasting. Elevations in one or all of these tests can be found in other disorders. You may need to have the tests repeated for the most accurate results.
A healthcare professional may suggest other tests to confirm the diagnosis and to look for other problems:
Genetic testing is recommended for all parents, siblings and children of anyone diagnosed with hemochromatosis. If a gene change is found in only one parent, then children do not need to be tested.
Medical professionals can treat hemochromatosis safely and effectively by removing blood from the body on a regular basis. This is similar to donating blood. The process is known as phlebotomy.
The goal of phlebotomy is to lower the iron levels. The amount of blood removed and how often it's removed depend on age, overall health and the severity of iron overload.
Treating hemochromatosis can help relieve symptoms of tiredness, stomach pain and skin darkening. It can help prevent serious complications such as liver disease, heart disease and diabetes. If you already have one of these conditions, phlebotomy may slow the progression of the disease. In some cases, it may even reverse it.
Phlebotomy can't reverse cirrhosis or joint pain, but it can slow the progression.
For someone with cirrhosis, a healthcare professional may recommend occasional screening for liver cancer. This usually involves an abdominal ultrasound and CT scan.
Phlebotomy may not be an option for someone who has certain conditions, such as anemia or heart complications. Instead, a healthcare professional may recommend a medicine to remove excess iron. The medicine can be injected into the body, or it can be taken as a pill. The medicine binds excess iron, allowing the body to expel iron through urine or stool in a process that's called chelation (KEE-lay-shun). Chelation is not commonly used in hemochromatosis.
In addition to therapeutic blood removal, making some lifestyle changes may further reduce the risk of complications from hemochromatosis, such as:
Additional dietary changes generally aren't required for people receiving blood removal treatment.
Make an appointment with someone on your primary healthcare team if you have any symptoms that worry you. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive diseases, called a gastroenterologist, or to another specialist, depending on your symptoms. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment, and what to expect.
Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Be ready to answer questions your care team may ask:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.