Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Trans fat raises "bad" cholesterol and lowers "good" cholesterol. Find out more about trans fat and how to stay away from it.
Experts say that trans fat is the worst type of fat to eat. That's because it raises "bad" cholesterol and lowers "good" cholesterol. A diet high in trans fat raises the risk of heart attack and stroke. Sometimes this type of fat also is called trans-fatty acids.
In some countries, government agencies have taken action to reduce or remove trans fat from the food supply. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration, also called FDA, has banned food makers from adding the major source of trans fats to foods and drinks.
The FDA expects that its move will prevent thousands of heart attacks and deaths every year. But many countries around the world haven't yet taken action to curb trans fats.
Most trans fat is made through a process that adds hydrogen to vegetable oil. This causes the oil to become solid at room temperature.
This partially hydrogenated oil isn't costly to make, and it has a long shelf life. Some restaurants use partially hydrogenated vegetable oil in their deep fryers. That's because it doesn't have to be changed as often as do other oils. Some areas in North America and Europe have passed laws to limit or ban the use of trans fat in restaurants and other businesses that prepare or serve food.
Some meat and dairy products have a small amount of natural trans fat. Natural trans fat also can be bad for health.
Trans fat from partially hydrogenated oil may be found in in food products such as:
Trans fat raises the risk of heart attacks and stroke. Trans fat also has a bad effect on cholesterol levels.
Trans fat raises LDL cholesterol and lowers HDL cholesterol. This can make a heart attack or stroke more likely.
In the United States, a food label can show 0 grams of trans fat if a food has less than 0.5 grams of trans fat in a serving.
Products made before the FDA ban of added trans fat might still be for sale. So check to see if a food's ingredient list says partially hydrogenated oil. If it does, that means the food has some trans fat in it, even if the amount is below 0.5 grams.
These hidden trans fats can add up quickly. That's especially true if you eat many servings of foods that have less than 0.5 grams a serving.
Try to limit foods with trans fat as much as possible. Trans fat is not part of a healthy diet.
Foods free of trans fats aren't always healthy. Food makers might use other ingredients that aren't good for you. Some of these ingredients have a lot of saturated fat that can raise cholesterol. Examples include coconut, palm kernel and palm oils.
In a typical healthy diet, about 20% to 35% of total daily calories can come from fat. Try to keep saturated fat at less than 10% of total daily calories. So if you eat about 2,000 calories a day, limit yourself to 120 calories or less from saturated fat.
Unsaturated fat is a healthier option than is saturated fat. Good sources of unsaturated fat include:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.