Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
At Mayo Clinic, health care professionals offer mammograms starting at age 40. Most people should have a mammogram every year.
When you should begin mammograms for breast cancer screening is something for you and your health care team to consider.
Mayo Clinic recommends that you talk with your doctor or health care professional. That person can help explain the pros and cons of mammograms. Together you can decide what is best.
Mayo Clinic supports screening starting at age 40 because screening mammograms can find breast cancer early. Finding cancer early makes it easier to cure. Studies show that using mammograms for breast cancer screening can lower the risk of dying of breast cancer.
Starting mammograms at age 40 may be particularly important for Black women. Black women tend to have breast cancer at a younger age. Black women are more likely to die of breast cancer, compared to people of other races.
Mammograms for breast cancer screening have some limits. The main concern is the chance of a false-positive result. This means that something is found on a mammogram, but, after more testing, it turns out to not be cancer. False-positives are more likely to occur in your 40s and 50s.
If an area of concern is found on a mammogram, you might need more testing. Health care professionals often recommend more mammogram images. Sometimes ultrasound imaging is used.
In certain situations, you may need to have a procedure to remove a sample of breast tissue for testing. This is called a biopsy. These other tests have some minor risks.
Some people feel frustrated that they had to undergo these other tests. Others feel reassured when they find out that there's no cancer.
The medical groups that create breast cancer screening guidelines don't always agree. It can be confusing when the guidelines change. If you're not sure what screening you should have, work with your health care team. Together you can decide what's best for you.
Mayo Clinic offers convenient online scheduling for screening mammograms. Whether you're already a patient or you're new to Mayo Clinic, make your appointment today.

                            There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                            Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                        

                        Sign up for free and receive the latest on breast cancer treatment, care
                        and management.
                    


ErrorEmail field is required
                        


ErrorInclude a valid email
                            address
                        
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                            You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                            requested in your inbox.
                        
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.