Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
People who can get the Shingrix vaccine in the U.S. should get it. That includes people who have had shingles.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says that adults age 50 and older should get the Shingrix vaccine to prevent shingles and complications from the. condition This is true for people who have had shingles and those who have not. It's also true for adults 19 and older who have weakened immune systems due to a condition or medicine.
You may get the Shingrix vaccine even if you've already had shingles. Also, think about getting the Shingrix vaccine if you've had the Zostavax vaccine in the past. And think about getting the vaccine if you don't know whether you've had chickenpox.
Shingrix is not a live virus vaccine. It's made of part of the virus. It's given in two doses. The second one is given 2 to 6 months after the first.
The most common side effects of a shingles vaccine are headaches and pain, soreness, swelling and itching where the shot was given. On white skin, the area might look red. On Black or brown skin the redness might be harder to see.
The shingles vaccine Zostavax is no longer sold in the U.S. It is sold in other countries. If you had a Zostavax vaccine, you should still get Shingrix.
Some people get shingles even with the vaccine. But the vaccine may reduce how bad shingles is and how long it lasts.
The vaccine also can lower the risk of a shingles complication that causes shingles pain to go on long after the blisters have cleared. This is called postherpetic neuralgia. Shingrix has been shown to protect against shingles for at least seven years.
Talk to your healthcare professional about whether you should get the vaccine if you:

                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
            
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.