Diabetic hypoglycemia refers to low blood sugar levels in a person with diabetes. Blood sugar, also called glucose, is the main source of fuel for the body and brain. You can't function well if your blood sugar drops below a healthy range.
For many people, hypoglycemia is a blood sugar level below 70 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 3.9 millimoles per liter (mmol/L). But your numbers might be different. Ask your healthcare professional about the right range for your blood sugar. This also is called your target range.
Pay attention to the early symptoms of hypoglycemia. Treat low blood sugar right away. You can raise your blood sugar quickly by taking glucose tablets. Or have a source of simple sugar, such as hard candy, fruit juice or regular soda. Also, tell family and friends to be aware of the symptoms that you might have with hypoglycemia. Let them know what to do if you're not able to treat the condition yourself.
Diabetic hypoglycemia can cause a number of symptoms. The symptoms depend on factors such as how long you've been getting low blood sugar and how serious it is. Even the time of day can play a role.
At first, symptoms of diabetic hypoglycemia include:
If diabetic hypoglycemia happens when you're sleeping, symptoms that may disturb your sleep include:
If diabetic hypoglycemia isn't treated, symptoms of low blood sugar get worse. These symptoms can include:
Symptoms can differ from person to person. Symptoms also can differ each time a person's blood sugar becomes low. Some people don't have any symptoms that they notice. It's also possible to have no symptoms of hypoglycemia. That makes it important to check your blood sugar regularly. Also, keep track of how you feel when your blood sugar is low.
Severe hypoglycemia can lead to serious medical problems that need emergency care. These include seizures and loss of consciousness. Make sure your family, friends and co-workers know what to do in an emergency.
Teach people you trust how to recognize symptoms of hypoglycemia. If others know what symptoms to look for, they might be able to alert you to early symptoms. It's also important that family members and close friends know how to help you in case of an emergency.
For example, if you pass out due to very low blood sugar, you'll need someone to give you treatment. The treatment for severe hypoglycemia is an injection of glucagon. Glucagon is a hormone that causes the liver to release sugar into the blood. Tell family and friends where you keep glucagon and how to give it to you.
Here's some emergency information to give to others. If you're with someone who loses consciousness or can't swallow due to low blood sugar:
If you have symptoms of hypoglycemia several times a week, see your healthcare professional. Your treatment plan may need to be changed.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Diabetic hypoglycemia has a number of causes. Low blood sugar is most common among people who take insulin. But low blood sugar also can happen if you use certain oral diabetes medicines, which are taken by mouth.
Common causes of diabetic hypoglycemia include:
Most of the body's blood sugar comes from food. The hormone insulin lowers blood sugar levels when blood sugar is too high. If you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes and need insulin to control your blood sugar, use insulin carefully. Taking more insulin than you need can cause your blood sugar level to drop too low. Hypoglycemia can happen as a result.
Your blood sugar may drop too low if you eat less than usual after you take your diabetes medicine. A drop in blood sugar also can happen if you exercise more than usual after taking your diabetes medicine. It isn't always easy to find the right balance between insulin, food and physical activity. But you can ask a member of your healthcare team to help you try to prevent low blood sugar levels. You might work with:
Some people have a greater risk of diabetic hypoglycemia, including:
Diabetic hypoglycemia can lead to other medical problems. If you ignore the symptoms of hypoglycemia too long, you may lose consciousness. That's because your brain needs blood sugar to work. So, it's important to spot the symptoms of hypoglycemia early.
Without treatment, hypoglycemia can lead to:
Take early symptoms seriously. Diabetic hypoglycemia can raise the risk of serious — even deadly — accidents.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.