A breast lump is a growth of tissue that forms in the breast. Most breast lumps are not irregular or cancerous. But it's key to have your healthcare professional check them promptly.
Breast tissue typically might feel lumpy or ropy. You also may have breast tenderness that comes and goes with your menstrual period.
If you have a health problem that affects your breasts, you might notice changes in how your breasts usually feel. These changes can include:
Make an appointment to have a breast lump checked, especially if:

                            There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                            Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                        

                        Sign up for free and receive the latest on breast cancer treatment, care
                        and management.
                    


ErrorEmail field is required
                        


ErrorInclude a valid email
                            address
                        
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                            You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                            requested in your inbox.
                        
See your healthcare professional to learn what kinds of tests you might need and which type of breast lump you have.
Risk factors for breast lumps caused by conditions that are not cancer include the following:
Some risk factors for breast cancer are within your control to change. These include:
Other risk factors for cancerous breast lumps can't be controlled. These include:
Some conditions that cause breast lumps may lead to other health concerns, also called complications. The complications depend on the type of breast lump that you have. For example, without treatment, some breast infections can cause pockets of pus to form in the breast.
Other breast conditions that are not cancer still can raise the risk of breast cancer later on. These include conditions that can cause lumps, such as atypical ductal hyperplasia, atypical lobular hyperplasia and lobular carcinoma in situ. If you have a breast condition that raises the risk of cancer, it doesn't mean that you'll definitely get breast cancer. Ask your healthcare professional what the risk means for you and whether you can make lifestyle changes to lower it.
Some breast lumps don't cause complications. For example, small cysts and simple fibroadenomas sometimes go away on their own over time.
There's no clear way to prevent many breast lumps. Breast lumps that are not cancer often are linked with natural changes in the body, such as hormonal changes over time.
But some risk factors for cancerous breast lumps are within your power to change. Take the following steps to lower your chances of breast cancer:

Suspicious breast lumps care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Breast Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.