Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
An AED may save your life during cardiac arrest. Weigh the pros and cons to see if you should get one.
An automated external defibrillator (AED) is a portable device that can be used to treat a person whose heart has suddenly stopped working. This condition is called sudden cardiac arrest.
AEDs are available in many public places, such as government buildings, schools, airports and other community spaces. Small, lightweight AEDs are available without a prescription for use at home.
People with severe heart disease who are at risk of sudden cardiac arrest might consider having an AED at home. Talk to your healthcare professional about whether you should buy an AED for your home.
An AED is used to revive someone from sudden cardiac arrest. This usually happens when a problem in the heart's electrical activity causes a dangerously irregular heartbeat. The irregular heartbeat prevents the heart from pumping as it should and causes the heart to stop.
When this happens, the brain and other organs don't get the blood and oxygen they need. Treatment is needed within minutes to prevent death. The sooner the heartbeat is restored, the greater the chance there won't be permanent damage to the brain and other organs.
All AEDs include instructions on when and how to use them. Training on proper use of an AED is recommended. But someone with no training also can use the device to reset the heartbeat of a person who has had a sudden cardiac arrest. Using the AED could possibly save a life.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) after cardiac arrest can keep blood flowing to the heart and brain for a time. But often only defibrillation can restore the heartbeat. Together these treatments can improve the chances of survival.
Home automated external defibrillator (AED)
An AED for home use is small and easy to carry.

An AED for home use is small and easy to carry.
If someone has fainted or collapsed and an AED is available:
Police and ambulance crews carry AEDs. Also, they're commonly found in many public places, such as malls, office buildings, schools, sports arenas, gyms and airplanes. But many cardiac arrests occur at home. Having a home AED may save precious minutes in treating a person who has a sudden cardiac arrest.
Supporters of home AEDs say putting them where they're needed most will save many lives. But critics argue there's not enough evidence to show that home AEDs save more lives.
For some people at high risk of cardiac arrest, an AED can provide peace of mind and might help save their lives. Here are some things to keep in mind when considering whether to buy an AED:
If you are thinking about an AED for your home, here are some tips for buying and maintaining a home AED:
AEDs offer a way to save a life. Before buying one, talk to a healthcare professional and do research. And don't forget to learn the basics, such as CPR.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.