Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Home / Pneumococcal Pneumonia / Tips for immunocompromised people: Healthy habits, vaccines and more
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Your immune system is in charge of protecting you against harmful bacteria, viruses, toxins and other substances. However, not everyone has an immune system that is at full strength. If you are someone with a compromised immune system, your body has a harder time fighting illness. You might get infections more frequently than others. And, once you have an infection, you will likely have a harder time returning to health than people with typical immune systems.
There are many different ways people can become immunocompromised, including:
According to Robert M. Jacobson, M.D., a pediatrician at Mayo Clinic, “Genetics appear to play a role in nearly every known autoimmune disease. In most diseases, more than one gene is involved.”
He adds, “It is clear that other factors affect whether a person will get an autoimmune disease. These include environmental factors. Triggers include infectious diseases. Autoimmune diseases themselves are not necessarily immunocompromising but their treatments often are.”
Most people who are immunocompromised have full, active lives. But, when you’re immunocompromised, it’s wise to take extra care to prevent infections from bacteria, toxins and viruses.
Vaccines are a critical tool for fighting viruses and infections. However, if you have a compromised immune system, it’s important to talk to your doctor about what vaccines are appropriate for your situation.
There are two main types of vaccines: inactivated and live vaccines.
“With mRNA vaccines, the vaccine uses the body’s cellular machinery to make protein fragments temporarily,” says Dr. Jacobson. “The fragments trigger the immune response but cannot cause an infection.
Often inactivated vaccines need more than one dose to create immunity and sometimes requires regular boosting.”
Inactivated vaccines are used to prevent RSV, shingles, hepatitis B, polio, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, COVID, HPV, Hib, meningococcal infections, hepatitis A, pneumococcal infections and rabies.
The CDC recommends that people who are immunocompromised get an annual:
Immunocompromised people will need more than one dose of the COVID vaccine as well as frequent boosters. Some individuals immunocompromised as a result of a solid organ transplant should receive a flu vaccine made for adults 65 years and older, even when they are as young as 19 years of age. Immunocompromised individuals should avoid the live attenuated influenza vaccine given by nasal spray.
According to the CDC, pneumococcal infections that cause pneumonia, bloodstream infections (sepsis) and meningitis kill tens of thousands of people in the United States every year. Vaccines help prevent pneumococcal disease.
There are several kinds ofpneumococcal vaccine. The vaccine that’s best for your circumstances depends on your age and risk factors and past pneumococcal vaccines received.
People who are advised to get pneumococcal vaccines include:
Learn more about why you should get pneumococcal vaccinations. 
Additional vaccines you may need include:
When you’re immunocompromised, you need to focus on your mental and physical health. It’s normal for people with chronic diseases to have feelings like anger, fear, sadness and stress.
After all, it’s no fun when you have to deal with:
You don’t have to do this alone. Consider:
Other behaviors practiced every day also can improve your mood and reduce your anxiety. Make these important habits stick:
If you feel depressed or have significant anxiety, seek the help of a mental health professional.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Practical steps based on brain science and development to help kids thrive – post-pandemic and beyond
Discover more Pneumococcal Pneumonia content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef
by Zaraq Khan, M.B.B.S., Samir Babayev, M.D., Chandra C. Shenoy, M.D.

      Robert M. Jacobson, M.D., FAAP
    

      Dr. Jacobson is the T Denny Sanford Professor of Pediatrics at Mayo Clinic with appointments in Community Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Infectious Diseases, and Epidemiology. He practices medicine as a primary care pediatrician at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota; teaches research methods and evidence-based medicine to the faculty, pediatric residents, and pediatric sub-specialty fellows; and serves the 11-county area as the Medical Director for the Immunization Program for Mayo Clinic’s Primary Care in Southeast Minnesota and co-chair of the AskMayoExpert Immunizations & Vaccinations Knowledge Content Board. He is a National Institutes of Health-funded investigator and conducts research to improve the uptake of vaccines. 
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by John D. Halamka, M.D., M.S., Paul Cerrato, M.A.
by Timothy I. Morgenthaler, M.D., Bhanu Prakash Kolla, M.B.B.S., M.D.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.
Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.