Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Healthy Aging / A healthy aging guide for prostate health: Risks, prevention and care
For Men’s Health Month, we’re getting to the bottom of something that many men dread: the prostate exam.
On this episode of “Aging Forward”, we probe with Dr. Derek Lomas into how diet affects prostate health, innovative approaches to prostate surgery, and how prostate screening might look different than what you think. 
Listen to A healthy aging guide for prostate health: Risks, prevention and care
Dr. Christina Chen: This is “Aging Forward,” a podcast from Mayo Clinic about the science behind healthy aging and longevity. Each episode, we explore new ways to take care of our long term health, the health of our loved ones, and our community, so we can all live longer and better.
I’m Dr. Christina Chen, a geriatrician and internist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. In this episode, we are talking about the prostate — what changes to expect as we age, the risks of prostate disease, and tips for prevention and care.
Our guest today is Dr. Derek Lomas. Dr. Lomas has a pharmacy background, but trained at Mayo Clinic and is now a practicing urologist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. Dr. Lomas also has a book out called Mayo Clinic on Prostate Health. Thank you so much for joining us, Dr. Lomas. Great to have you here today.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Absolutely. It’s my pleasure to be here.
Dr. Christina Chen: All right. Let’s start with the very, very basics here, which is talking about the prostate as an organ. What is it? What does it do, and how does it impact health as a whole?
Dr. Derek Lomas: The prostate is a small little gland about the size of a walnut. It’s only found in men. It sits just below the bladder. It sits like a donut underneath it.
The bladder, the urinary bladder holds urine, and it produces some of the fluid in semen — the ejaculate — and helps sperm travel. It’s important for reproduction. But since the urine has to flow through it, it can affect your wellbeing as you age. As men get older, it’s normal for the prostate to grow, and if that donut hole shrinks up, it can press on the urethra leading to problems with urination, waking up at night, things like that.
Dr. Christina Chen: Sounds like an important gland.
Dr. Christina Chen: But with all organs that change over time, the prostate also changes.
Dr. Christina Chen: Can you describe a little bit about how aging affects the prostate gland?
Dr. Derek Lomas: The more time you’re alive, the more time the prostate has to grow. Every man’s prostate grows at a different rate. With some men it grows rapidly, some men it grows very rarely at all. But if you ask most men in their sixties, seventies, eighties, they’re starting to notice a difference with their urination related to their prostate.
Dr. Christina Chen: Prostate growth is very common. What are some other common issues that surface with the prostate over time, and why is it such a key concern for aging men?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Probably three main things that go on with the prostate. We talked about growth, called BPH or Benign Prostate Hyperplasia. It just means a non-cancerous growth of the prostate. Again, very common with age.
Another condition that men can suffer from related to the prostate is called prostatitis. This can be related to infection or just inflammatory response. This can cause discomfort and pain.
Then prostate cancer is another one we worry about. This is one of the most common cancers in men and increases in risk as men age.
Dr. Christina Chen: Are there normal changes with prostate growth in terms of just what’s typical and what’s atypical?
Dr. Derek Lomas: It’s natural to have some urinary changes as you age: weaker flow, going more frequently. It all has to do with bother, though. If you’re not bothered by it, if it’s not impacting things you like to do, it might not be a big deal.
But pay attention to it. If it’s starting to impact your quality of life, keeping you from doing things you like to do ‘cause you’re always worried about that bathroom, then it’s probably time to see a doctor.
Dr. Christina Chen: The most annoying symptom that I hear commonly is the need to get up in the middle of the night. Having to wake up and, and then urinate, and then they can’t fall asleep.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Waking up at night, or nocturia, is one of the most frustrating symptoms. There’s a lot of different causes. We’d like to say it’s all the prostate, but there’s so much that goes into it.
Taking into account what you drink in the evening, what you drink in the last few hours you’re awake, it’s going to turn into urine at night. If you overfill your bladder, it’s going to send you a signal to wake up.
Other things happen when you lay down as well. If you’re someone that gets a lot of fluid that builds up in your legs and you lay flat, all of a sudden that’s going to turn back into blood and back into urine and going to make you go up.
Things that are completely unrelated to the prostate can cause waking up at night as well. A common thing I see is sleep apnea. It’s really important to kind of look at the whole picture rather than just go straight to the prostate.
A lot of men, once we manage their fluids, get them to a sleep study, look at other things, raising their legs up in a chair, we can really reduce that. But it’s really what we call multifactorial — multiple things that contribute.
Dr. Christina Chen: You mentioned earlier that when things become bothersome enough where it’s affecting your quality of life, to seek evaluation then. Is there a benefit to doing that earlier? Because I feel like by then it’s fairly progressed.
Dr. Derek Lomas: If you’re starting to notice difficulty getting the urine out, feeling like you’re not emptying at the end, certainly mention that to your doctor. There’s non-invasive tests that can be done to check your bladder flow, to check how much you’re leaving behind. Certainly not too early to consider work-up, but maybe too early to consider things like surgery if it’s a mild degree of bother.
Dr. Christina Chen: Yeah. Yeah. At least to be informed about what to look for, right? Let’s talk about risk factors in screening. Can you give us a general overview of the biggest contributors to prostate disease as a whole, and cancer for that matter?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Age is the biggest factor. It’s going to increase with age. But family history matters a lot, too. If your dad or brother, or uncle had prostate cancer, your risk is higher. There are certain genes that can predispose you to the BRCA genes. Breast, ovarian, pancreatic — if those all run in the family prostate, then you can be at higher risk if you carry that gene.
African-Americans are also at higher risk for prostate cancer, so really important for screening and even maybe to begin screening earlier. In terms of other risk factors, certain environmental exposures, pesticides, and industrial chemicals, Agent Orange — things that have been associated with prostate cancer as well.
Dr. Christina Chen: I see. How about diet and lifestyle? Does that impact prostate health much?
Dr. Derek Lomas: It does. There’s reasonable evidence to suggest that eating a heart healthy diet, Mediterranean type diet — fruits, vegetables, avoiding red meats — can be healthy for the prostate. I was just at our largest urology conference of the year where they were presenting on men with low grade prostate cancer and does diet and exercise prevent progression and found that by having a Mediterranean or heart healthy diet, they saw less progression.
Unfortunately, exercise didn’t. But there’s many other reasons to exercise. I tell patients, “It’s probably going to have a mild effect on your prostate health. But if blood isn’t pumping to your prostate, your prostate doesn’t matter.”
Dr. Derek Lomas: Heart comes first and that’s going to be doing the most for someone’s health overall. I never discourage it.
Dr. Christina Chen: We can make the argument that exercise may have a role in pelvic floor health.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Absolutely. If we look at the other side, not the cancer side, we know if you’re overweight, you have higher risks of urinary symptoms, urinary incontinence, things like that. Reducing weight can really improve that.
Dr. Christina Chen: As we talk about screening for prostate cancer there’s this big debate back and forth about when to screen and how frequently that should occur. What’s your take on all that?
Dr. Derek Lomas: In general, for screening of prostate cancer, we use a blood test called PSA, or Prostate Specific Antigen. This is a substance that all prostate cells make. It’s not specific to cancer, but cancer cells tend to be more poorly formed, so more releases into the bloodstream. We can see higher levels.
It’s important to say off the bat that PSA doesn’t equal prostate cancer. Other things like inflammation, large prostates, even temporary things like exercise, sexual activity, can cause temporary increases. But it’s a really good screening test. It’s become kind of the mainstay of screening.
Rectal exam, where a gloved finger is put in the bottom to palpate or feel the back of the prostate is helpful as well, but we can only feel the backside. A negative prostate exam isn’t necessarily helpful. It’s helpful when we feel something. Really that’s become kind of lower down on the list.
But in general we do recommend screening. The American Urological Association does have a position on screening. We say that a man should get a baseline test around age 45. If you’re at higher risk — family history, African-American — you might want to consider it at age 40. Then use that number to risk-adjust how often you need to get it afterwards. But in general, we say every two to four years.
Now, if a man’s at higher risk, maybe you do that yearly. If their first PSA is really low, maybe you’re on the four year spectrum.
The benefit of doing it less frequently is, on the flip side of not missing a diagnosis, we don’t want to overdiagnose prostate cancer. You may avoid that by doing a less frequent test, but still picking up the cancers that matter.
Dr. Christina Chen: That’s helpful to know. How about in the oldest old, say, 80 and above?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Our guidelines say up until about age 70 is probably a good idea in most patients — but it still is life expectancy-dependent. In order to get a benefit from a diagnosis of prostate cancer, you really need a life expectancy of about 10 years, because if you have a less than 10-year life expectancy and we find a cancer and we treat it, it probably wasn’t going to be the thing that got you anyway. Now we’ve needlessly diagnosed and treated and maybe caused harm.
After 70, it’s much more of an individualized discussion of, “Well, what else do we have going on?” We can use actuarial tables or calculators to tell us, well, an average 74-year-old, how much do we think you have left? Then you can pull in other conditions they have and see where this is on the list. If life expectancy is less than 10 years, then it’s probably a good idea to stop PSA screening.
Dr. Christina Chen: That in combination with, you mentioned earlier, the digital rectal exam. For someone who’s never had it before — can you describe what that’s like?
Dr. Derek Lomas: What it involves is the doctor or provider will put a gloved finger in the bottom— lubricated— and press on the back of the prostate to feel for any lumps. It feels pressure, it may be uncomfortable. Generally the man lays on his side or leans over the exam table.
Again, this is now becoming considered optional as part of the screening. Just because the ability of the rectal exam alone to detect cancer is probably pretty low overall.
Dr. Derek Lomas: If that’s what’s keeping you from getting screened, you can still get a PSA screening and decline the rectal exam, or if you’re doing remote screening or something like that.
Dr. Christina Chen: Then there’s other things too, like the urine specimen and the symptom score index; there’s ultrasounds and then biopsies, each one becoming more and more invasive in nature. Which ones do we need to know about early on? Does everyone need to go through all of that testing?
Dr. Derek Lomas: First off, if you have a PSA test and it’s elevated or a high level, the first thing you should do is get it repeated. I’ll usually repeat it in four to six weeks, because as we talked about a little earlier, there’s things that can temporarily increase the PSA levels.
If you’re worried that there might be a urinary infection contributing, maybe the person’s having some urinary urgency, burning, things like that, then a urinalysis or urine culture can be helpful to kind of rule that out.
If that second repeat test is still elevated, then there’s a couple different pathways you can take. The kind of historical pathway was you’d go straight to a prostate biopsy. That would involve usually 12 random samples taken throughout the prostate to see if we could find prostate cancer.
More recently, there’s been a shift to using other testing before jumping right to biopsy. That can be additional urine or blood tests we call biomarkers. In the urine we can look for things called exosomes and find a probability of cancer being present.
There’s blood tests that look for — not PSA, but things like PSA — again, to try and predict the likelihood of a cancer being present. But by far what we use most commonly is an imaging and prostate MRI. Prostate MRI is really good at ruling out prostate cancer.
If there’s no cancer present, you’ll get a low score on an MRI. It has a five point scale. If the MRI is negative, and maybe it gives another explanation — like, the prostate’s on the larger side and that explains the PSA — there’s usually a less than 10 percent chance of a clinically significant or aggressive cancer being there and we can avoid the biopsy altogether.
Dr. Derek Lomas: If it’s a higher score, it allows us to direct the biopsy or aim at where the tumor might be in the prostate. That’s kind of the pathway we generally take here.
If there’s an elevated PSA, confirmatory PSA, we go to MRI, because it’s going to give us a much, much bigger picture of what’s going on, and potentially, avoid a biopsy altogether. There’s also calculators we can use that take into account risk factors, family history, to again figure out a probability.
Then on the urinary symptom side of things, we can do symptom scores to assess the degree of bother and tests that look at bladder flow and things as well.
Dr. Christina Chen: It sounds like a lot to choose and juggle from.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah. There’s a lot out there and it’s not one size fits all. There’s certain situations where maybe a man can’t get an MRI, because they have maybe an implanted device and we have to kind of alter our pathway. We have different avenues available. There’s not necessarily a right answer, but we’ll find the right one for that patient.
Dr. Christina Chen: Let’s dive a little bit deeper into specific prostate conditions. You mentioned three of the most common ones, and we’re going to focus on BPH and prostate cancer today.
Let’s start with BPH, which is Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia, a noncancerous growth of the prostate. Does it need to be treated?
Dr. Derek Lomas: It doesn’t always need to be treated. Sometimes we’ll get imaging back where it will make a comment, Prostatomegaly, which means a big prostate. If you ask the patient, “How’s urination?”
“Oh no, no big deal. No bother.” Just having a big prostate doesn’t mean you need medication or need treatment.
A lot of times we’ll have patients fill out what’s called an IPSS or International Symptom Score for their prostate, and it’ll put patients into categories: mild, moderate or severe in terms of their symptoms.
It asks about things like urgency, frequency emptying, and we can use that to help guide how aggressive we need to be with therapy. But if they’re in the mild category, we’ll review the options, whether it’s taking medications or surgeries, and they might feel at that point the risks outweigh the benefits of the side effects of surgery and medications and elect to monitor. We call that monitoring or watchful waiting.
But if they’re starting to have more of an impact on their quality of life or they’re having negative consequences like urinary tract infections, maybe they’re not emptying their bladder completely. Maybe they ended up in the ER ‘cause they couldn’t pee and required a catheter.
They’re having blood in the urine, they’re having other issues. Then it’s time to think about medications, or maybe even surgery.
Dr. Christina Chen: Does every BPH situation progress? When you start to develop symptoms, it’s like, “Okay, we can watchfully wait.” But if you treat them early, is there a role in preventing it from getting to the degree of..?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah, the one thing we have to be careful about is the bladder function declining with time.
Dr. Derek Lomas: The most common medications we use for BPH are called alpha blockers. These are medications like Flomax or Tamsulosin, or Rapaflo, are some of the trade names. These work by relaxing the muscles within the prostate and bladder neck and allow the urine to flow out better. They work very well. But I don’t want to say they’re a Band-Aid, but it’s temporary. They work while you take them.
Sometimes it’s hard for men to realize that there’s changes happening under the surface. It’s important that if you start on medications that you’re continuing to monitor the situation. Or if you’re doing watchful waiting, that you’re having ongoing follow up to look at things like, are you starting to retain more in your bladder? Are your symptom scores going up? Because we don’t want to miss our window.
If we have the bladder under stress for a long time and we don’t address the root cause, then by the time we go in and do the surgery, we may have missed our optimal strategies.
There is a role for early surgery in men that are having severe symptoms, or maybe men that don’t want to take medications or don’t tolerate medications. Then we have the advantage of being able to do maybe some of the more minimally invasive surgeries that maybe carry a lower risk or have a quicker recovery, as opposed to if we intervene late and we have to be very aggressive with removing a lot of tissue.
Dr. Christina Chen: What’s the most common surgery you do for BPH?
Dr. Derek Lomas: The most common surgery I’m doing right now is called aquablation. Aquablation — or robotic water jet ablation — of the prostate.
Dr. Derek Lomas: It’s a newer one. We started doing it last year, but it’s been around for five or six years. We waited for the data to mature before we decided to bring it on here at Mayo. Essentially what it involves is a procedure under general anesthesia. We put an ultrasound in the patient’s bottom that allows us to visualize the prostate on imaging, and then we put a special camera into the urethra again, while the patient’s asleep. Out of the side of that camera is a high-pressure water jet. Think about a pressure washer that aims down.
We’re able to, on the ultrasound, draw the amount of tissue we want removed from the prostate. Then the robotic water jet follows our plan, and basically pressure-washes the tissue out of the prostate — or if you’re mechanically inclined, a CNC machine — and removes that tissue. And it’s using a water jet, which is avoiding a lot of heat or thermal effect.
As you can imagine though, that doesn’t do a lot to seal up blood vessels. We do have to go in after that is done and seal up any areas that are bleeding and trim the tissue away. Some advantages of this approach is, since it’s imaging-guided and robotically assisted, it’s very consistent with the amount of tissue that’s removed. It’s also specifically designed to spare tissue in certain places.
Some of the risks with prostate surgery and BPH surgery are changes to urinary and sexual function. Urinary leakage or incontinence. On the sexual side, erectile dysfunction and changes in ejaculation or loss of ejaculation.
But with this procedure there are very low rates of incontinence, low rates of erectile dysfunction, and it spares tissue in such a way to try and promote maintaining ejaculation as well. It works over a wide range of prostate sizes, from the mild to moderate, all the way up to the large prostates.
Dr. Christina Chen: That is fascinating. I’m just envisioning a water pick for your teeth.
Dr. Christina Chen: Except you’re doing it in the prostate.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Most patients stay just one evening in the hospital and have a catheter for a couple days after. Then the catheter comes out and there’s some irritation with urination, and some intermittent mild blood in the urine. We ask them to take it easy for a couple of weeks.
But in general, they’re noticing an immediate improvement in flow. Those that were having catheters before, maybe got away from the catheters.
It’s been an exciting thing to be able to offer and compliment our other things; ranging from steam ablation of the prostate, all the way up to robotic simple prostatectomy where they’re actually surgically removing the center of the prostate for very big prostates. So we got all, all things.
Dr. Christina Chen: A lot to choose from. Thanks for sharing that. Yeah. I didn’t realize how much innovation has expanded in that space of treatment. Then prostate cancer, this is probably a whole topic separate in itself. But just at a high level, can you just talk about the general stages? How are the symptoms different from BPH? Then how is each stage treated?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Early prostate cancer often has no symptoms, and that’s why we need to use screening to find it. Most men that come in with symptoms, it’s not prostate-cancer causing, it’s the BPH. The prostate has a couple of different zones, but in general, there’s an outer shell called the peripheral zone, which is kind of a shell around the outside and a center portion called the transition zone.
The transition zone is where this BPH growth is that pinches on the urethra. Cancer generally doesn’t form there, it generally forms on the outer edge.
It takes more advanced cancer to start causing symptoms. But they can be the same: difficulty urinating, weak, slow stream, blood in the urine. If it’s really advanced or spread, it could be muscle aches, or bone pains. But generally though, it’s no symptoms. That’s why screening is important.
In terms of stages, most cancers are found when they’re localized, meaning in the prostate alone. But with time they can grow outside the prostate to things nearby like the rectum or the bladder.
Then metastatic, or if it’s spread beyond the prostate, the thing like lymph nodes or bones. Again, fortunately, these days we find most of them when they’re localized and outcomes are very good.
Dr. Christina Chen: As far as treatments have we seen overall better outcomes over the years, now that we’ve done more research and we know more about it and the treatments have kind of advanced as well? Is survival better compared to say 2013?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah. Survival is really good. Especially for localized. Another thing we use for prostate cancer is something called risk stratification. Cancers are broadly low risk, intermediate risk, or high risk.
For low risk cancers, many times we’re telling patients it’s appropriate to monitor it or do something called active surveillance. Because these cancers are unlikely to grow or progress.
We can avoid the side effects of treatment. We kind of assess the likelihood of the cancer causing them harm. Active surveillance doesn’t mean we forget about it. We follow PSA testing, imaging, even follow up biopsy. If the numbers change, if it moves to a higher risk category, then we intervene at that time.
The good news is whether we intervene at day one when they’re diagnosed, or a couple years later, if they progress, the outcomes seem to be very similar. It’s about delaying treatment until it’s necessary, hopefully forever in some men. But in other men, at least they’re getting several years of avoiding side effects.
In terms of surgery and radiation — so the most common surgery is what we call radical prostatectomy. Historically it was an incision, a cut in the belly, open the patient up, remove the prostate. Now it’s being done minimally invasively with robotic assistance in most men.
We, even here at Mayo, have a single port system where they can do it all through one kind of small incision mainly. Then my colleagues that do prostatectomies have advanced techniques that are important for improving continence or urinary control. There’s been a lot of advances there.
Same on the radiation side, between more focused radiation, proton beam radiation, putting special gels behind the prostate to give more space from the rectum to help reduce the risk of injury to the rectum.
Again, if men are worried because they heard their father or grandfather had a terrible time with prostate cancer treatment and that’s keeping them from getting screened, it has come a long way.
Dr. Christina Chen: Thank you for that reassurance because I think we hear of the bad case scenarios. We don’t realize that there’s a lot — many people do well. You mentioned some side effects in terms of incontinence, and sexual dysfunction. But do people generally do pretty well after treatment?
Dr. Derek Lomas: In general. I mean, there is going to be a recovery. Certainly in the short term those are common things.
With more recovery, things like pelvic floor exercises to strengthen muscles, it’s uncommon in my experience to see men in diapers, which is what every man worries about when they hear “prostate surgery.”
But there are cases of severe incontinence or leakage, but we do have options. We have artificial sphincter devices that can be put in, urinary slings, medications. Same on the erection side.
Many men can respond to oral medications like Sildenafil, Viagra, Tadalafil, or Cialis, but there’s things like vacuum erection devices, medications that can be ejected into the penis and even implants. There’s ways to treat these things if they do arise.
Dr. Christina Chen: Are there any other cool advancements in the space of prostate health, whether it’s cancer treatment or BPH or…?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Lots of new advancements. From a cancer standpoint, using an image-guided approach to diagnosis rather than just jumping to biopsy with everyone. That’s letting us have better biopsies, but also avoiding over-diagnosis because as I mentioned, a lot of these low grade cancers we’re going to tell you to watch it.
Really, we’re not getting a huge benefit by finding it. How can we do a better job of finding the men that are going to benefit from a treatment, but not giving that undue worry to men that have a cancer that’s not going to threaten them?
Dr. Derek Lomas: The other advance is the way we do the biopsy. The classic approach to a prostate biopsy was to put an ultrasound in the rectum in the bottom. Through the ultrasound a needle would pass, it would go through the rectal wall and into the prostate. It’s called a transrectal biopsy. As you can imagine, maybe not the cleanest way to pass a needle.
Dr. Derek Lomas:  It’s associated with infection risk, something called sepsis with a severe infection.
There’s even reports of patients, unfortunately, dying after that type of biopsy. We switched our practice over to something called transperineal biopsy. Now for transperineal biopsy, we still put the ultrasound on the bottom, but the needle passes through the skin. The perineum is the patch of skin behind the scrotum.
We can clean that off. That really helps reduce the likelihood that you’re passing through a contaminated field so we can de-escalate the need for antibiotics. I also feel it gets us some better sampling around the prostate. That’s been an advance.
Other cool things, artificial intelligence, AI are increasingly being used in all things medicine. On the prostate side of things imaging, helping us review the MRIs, helping us review the pathology and predict outcomes. That’s been something interesting to see.
Then, on the cancer side, again, focal therapy, which is something I work with. That’s, rather than pulling out the whole prostate, radiating the whole prostate, treating just the portion that has the cancer.
Dr. Christina Chen: Can you expand on what focal therapy is? What does that look like?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Broadly focal therapy is the idea that we’re gonna go in and ablate or use an energy to destroy a portion of the prostate that contains the cancer and try to leave the rest of the prostate alone. We do this in a lot of other diseases, a lot of other cancers.
In the kidney, we remove a part of the kidney or freeze a part of the kidney. For breast cancer, we do a lumpectomy. For brain cancer, we don’t remove the whole brain.
Prostate’s one of the few organs or cancers where we just take out the whole organ. There’s a couple of reasons for that, historically. Number one is up until recently we didn’t have great imaging of the prostate.
We couldn’t really see it well on things like ultrasound and CT. As prostate MRI has gained popularity and we’ve become good at seeing it. We’re better able to direct therapy.
The other part of it is a lot of prostate cancer is what we call multifocal. Meaning there’s not just one tumor in there. There may be more than one. But with MRI and biopsy, we’re able to identify those patients that might have what we call an index lesion or dominant tumor that will be candidates for this.
Dr. Christina Chen: Tell us about some of the different technologies and procedures that you use for focal therapy — because it seems like it’s an evolving field, and there’s lots of ways to treat the prostate with that method.
Dr. Derek Lomas: The first technology I use is called HIFU, High Intensity Focused Ultrasound. It’s a procedure done under general anesthesia, involves putting a special ultrasound probe in the bottom, and it’s kind of like putting a magnifying glass in the sun.
If you focus the sound wave just right, like you would with a magnifying glass in light, you can create heat. If you focus your magnifying glass on a leaf, you can burn a hole in it. You pass your hand right in front of it, you don’t feel it. It’s doing that with sound waves through the rectum and we can direct that at areas within the prostate to heat and destroy areas about the size of a grain of rice.
But then we keep doing that in a quadrant or section of the prostate to create an ablation. We use a 3D model of the MRI that’s important to help us guide that as well.
Dr. Christina Chen: I’m going to butcher this, but… irreversible electroporation?
Dr. Christina Chen: Did I say that right?
Dr. Derek Lomas: That one works a little differently. It’s again, under anesthesia ultrasound on the bottom.
We pass small needle-like probes through the skin, similar to how I do a transperennial biopsy. Those probes basically surround the tumor. Then an electrical current goes between each of the probes and passes through the tissue.
What that current does is it creates holes or nanopores in the cells. Those holes can’t repair themselves, so the tissue dies off. Anything within the path of where we place the electrodes is able to be killed.
Now, since we keep the current and power at a level lower it doesn’t create a lot of heat or thermal effects. We think this might help have some sparing effects on things like nerves or the urethra that runs through the prostate.
We were just part of a trial using this system, the NanoKnife system, that should be coming out soon. But what we found was it had low rates of complications and when we went and biopsied the patients a year later, most of the men were cancer-free. This actually led towards FDA approval for the technology just this last year for prostate ablation.
 Dr. Christina Chen: There’s a lot of blasting and vaporizing and shooting and…
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah. Now, it’s important to say with these focal therapies that not everyone’s going to qualify.The other thing is that this is newer and if we look at our guidelines both from urology and National Comprehensive Cancer Network these aren’t quite part of the standard of care yet. They’re still considered investigational. That can have some drawbacks for things like insurance coverage.
Then follow-ups are important. Since we are only treating a portion of the prostate, we have to continue to monitor the rest of it. It’s not for everyone, but it offers generally a quicker recovery, offers lower rates of sexual dysfunction, lower rates of urinary dysfunction. It’s a good option for men that qualify.
Dr. Christina Chen: What’s your take on over-the-counter supplements? The supplement world is just so big and there’s all sorts of things out there for prostate health, between saw palmetto and other things. Have you noticed any benefit to that?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah. They may provide some mild relief. There’s some data behind saw palmetto. But really the data is from studies that are not well designed. It’s not consistent. Then also you have to be careful with these supplements that they’re actually containing what’s inside them.
They’re not something I generally prescribe or recommend if a patient asks about them. I say there’s conflicting data on things like saw Palmetto, beta sitosterol, pygeum, zinc are ones that you might see in the prostate supplements.
Really important to make sure you’re buying it from a reputable source. Make sure it’s USP certified. If your symptoms are getting to the point that you think you need to take a supplement, make sure you’re talking to your doctor about it as well.
Number one, it may interact with your other medications, and number two, maybe you need to see a urologist and talk about these symptoms more and make sure there’s not something else going on.
Dr. Christina Chen: Right, right. All good advice. For the people in their twenties and thirties, the younger folks right now, what kind of things can they be doing to be proactive about prevention of prostate disease?
Dr. Derek Lomas: The things that are good for overall health are going to be good for your prostate. Eat well, stay active, don’t smoke, manage your stress.
Sometimes if you have a lot of stress and tension, that can go down to the pelvic floor and cause some urinary dysfunction. If you have things like leakage, pelvic floor exercises can be helpful.
There’s been some studies that have also shown that being sexually active can reduce your risk of prostate disease. At least two studies have shown that more frequent ejaculation was associated with a lower rate of prostate cancer. Not huge evidence out there, but maybe that’s something.
Dr. Christina Chen: Okay. Well there you go. Have healthy relationships.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Healthy relationships. Yeah.
I’m sure you have many stories, but can you think of any, from the top of your head, a success story of a patient that you treated for prostate disease that was impacting his quality of life and how they’ve lived well with it since then?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Lots of success stories of gentlemen that were told, “Well, you have to get your prostate out,” or “You have to get radiated. There’s no other option,” and we were able to treat them with one of these technologies or get them on a clinical trial.
Here we are, years later, where they have not had recurrence of their cancer. They’ve avoided invasive treatment side effects, and they’re very happy.
Dr. Christina Chen: What do you think are the biggest barriers preventing men from seeking medical care — not just their prostate health, but just their health in general? Because I feel, from my observation, sometimes it’s too late. My father’s a good example. He’s 87. He refuses to go to the doctor.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Yeah. I mean, maybe men feel like they’re too busy or they can’t take time off from work, or we’ll probably all see those patients where they’ll say, “Well, I don’t have any medical conditions, but I also haven’t been to a doctor in 30 years.”
It’s important to get checked out from the prostate specifically in urology. Men might be embarrassed or it’s not something you typically talk about over coffee with your friends.
But I’m sure if they did, they’d realize a lot of men are having these same issues. It’s a lot more common than they think.
Dr. Christina Chen: Yeah. To add to that, in my practice, I do see just a lot of days ruined when the whole bladder issue gets in the way. People plan their days around their bladder. They don’t get sleep because of urgency and having to go so often. Early treatment from that aspect can help improve quality of life there, too.
Dr. Derek Lomas: One of the questions I’ll ask patients is, “What does this keep you from doing that you like to do?” If they have an answer like that, then we have to do something. If it takes them a while to scratch their head, then maybe we’re not at that point. Butif you always know where the next bathroom is, then it’s probably time to have a conversation.
Dr. Christina Chen: Right. Thank you for that. I have one last question that we like to ask our guest speakers. What does aging forward mean to you and how do you like to age gracefully?
Dr. Derek Lomas: Aging well is staying active, physically, but also mentally. Being proactive about health, living life fully at every stage, realizing it’s going to be different at every stage. As you age, you’re gonna have more limitations. Things are probably gonna ache more, but find things to do and it doesn’t have to limit you.
The goal isn’t just the quantity of life, how many years you’re gonna live, but the quality and how you can make the most out of it.
Dr. Christina Chen: Thank you for that. That’s what our listeners really enjoy is that we’re not just talking about a medical issue. We’re talking to an expert about how they live their lives and we’re all in the same boat. We’re all getting older.
But there’s so much we can do about it. I didn’t realize how much fun I’d have talking about prostate health today, but I really appreciate you being here and I know this will be a very well received message, so thank you.
Dr. Derek Lomas: Well, thanks for having me.
Dr. Christina Chen: That’s all for this episode. Hopefully you’re feeling a little more informed, inspired, and empowered. To learn more about Dr. Lomas’ book, Mayo Clinic on Prostate Health, check out the show notes online.
On the next episode of “Aging Forward,” we’ll be talking about the value of preventive screening in healthy aging.
Dr. Christina Chen: What are the general outcomes for older adults who have gone through, say, better preventive health screening?
Dr. Danny Sanchez-Pellecer: I definitely see lower rates of hospitalizations, less healthcare expenditure when it comes to money, and higher rates of cure, depending on what we’re dealing with.
And the rule is usually when we catch cancer in patients that have their normal follow-ups, we usually catch it early— so it never gets that bad. And in fact, many times we can get patients in complete remission, meaning that we are able to cure them— as long as we catch things on time.
Dr. Christina Chen: If you have a topic suggestion for a future episode, you can leave us a voicemail at (507) 538-6272 — we might even feature your voice on the show!
For more“Aging Forward” episodes and resources, head to mayoclinic.org/agingforward. If you found this show helpful, please subscribe, and make sure to rate and review us on your podcast app. It really helps others find our show.
Thanks for listening, and until next time, stay curious and stay active.
Man Overboard! is a fun-to-read handbook on men’s health is written by Craig L. Bowron, M.D. who uses his years of education and professional experience to help you get through this pilgrimage, this magical journey of aging-while-male, not unscathed but with a sense of control and dignity. You can get…
Discover more Healthy Aging content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Stephanie S. Faubion, M.D., Maddy Dychtwald
by Nathan K. LeBrasseur, Ph.D., Christina Chen, M.D.
by Nathan K. LeBrasseur, Ph.D., Christina Chen, M.D., Maddy Dychtwald, Stephen L. Kopecky, M.D.
by Derek J. Lomas, M.D., Paras H. Shah, M.D.

      Christina Chen, M.D., is a geriatrician in the division of Community Internal Medicine, Geriatrics and Palliative Care at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.. She is the host of the Mayo Clinic podcast, “Aging Forward.”
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Stephanie S. Faubion, M.D., Maddy Dychtwald
by Derek J. Lomas, M.D., Paras H. Shah, M.D.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.