Your health care provider can usually diagnose cold sores just by looking at them. To confirm the diagnosis, your health care provider might take a sample from the blister for testing in a laboratory.
Cold sores often clear up without treatment in 2 to 4 weeks. Your doctor might prescribe antiviral medicine that may speed the healing process. Examples include:
Some of these products are pills. Others are creams you put on the sores several times a day. In general, the pills work better than the creams. For very severe infections, some antiviral medicines can be injected.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
The cold sore ointment docosanol (Abreva) may shorten the healing time of a cold sore. At the first sign of symptoms, apply it to the affected skin as directed on the package. Use a cotton-tipped swab to put medicine on a cold sore. This helps prevent the spread of the sores to other parts of the body.
Studies about whether alternative medicine helps with cold sores have had mixed results. Some approaches that people use for cold sores include:
Cold sores often clear up without treatment in 2 to 4 weeks. Make an appointment with your primary care provider if your cold sores:
Before your appointment, you may want to list answers to the following questions:
Below are some basic questions to ask your health care provider about cold sores.
Your health care provider is likely to ask you a few questions. Being ready to answer them may reserve time to go over any points you want to talk about in-depth. Your health care provider may ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.