Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Taking an aspirin a day can be a lifesaving option, but it's not for everyone. Get the facts before considering a daily aspirin.
Taking aspirin every day may lower the risk of heart attack and stroke. But daily aspirin therapy isn't for everyone. Is it right for you?
The answer depends on your age, overall health, history of heart disease, and risk of heart attack or stroke.
Daily aspirin therapy may be used in two ways:
Don't start taking a daily aspirin without talking with your healthcare professional. For most adults, it's usually safe to take an occasional aspirin or two for headaches, body aches or fever. But taking aspirin every day can have serious side effects, including bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract. The gastrointestinal tract includes the mouth, throat, esophagus, stomach, intestines, rectum and anus.
Talk with your healthcare team about the pros and cons of daily aspirin therapy. Together you can discuss whether an aspirin a day might help you prevent a heart attack or stroke.
The risk of heart attack and stroke goes up as you get older. But the risk of bleeding from aspirin goes up even more. So:
Because of bleeding risks, some guidelines say that people age 60 and older without known heart or blood vessel disease should not start taking a daily aspirin to prevent a first-time heart attack or stroke. But guidelines vary among organizations. Other recommendations say you should not take a daily aspirin after age 70.
If you're between ages 60 and 69, ask your healthcare professional how daily aspirin therapy may affect you.
Daily low-dose aspirin therapy may be recommended for the primary prevention of heart attack or stroke if:
If you've had a heart attack or stroke or you have known heart disease, your healthcare professional may tell you to take an aspirin a day to prevent heart attacks or strokes. You should not take a daily aspirin if you have a serious aspirin allergy or history of bleeding.
Aspirin thins the blood and helps prevent blood clots. Sometimes clots happen inside a heart artery. The clot slows or stops blood flow to the heart. This can cause a heart attack. The buildup of fats, cholesterol, and other substances in and on the artery walls, a condition called atherosclerosis, increases the risk of blood clots in the heart arteries.
Since aspirin prevents blood clots, it's thought that daily aspirin therapy could possibly prevent a heart attack.
Take a daily aspirin only if your healthcare professional tells you to do so. Before starting daily aspirin therapy, tell your healthcare team about all the health conditions you have.
Daily aspirin therapy may not be a good choice if you have:
You and your healthcare professional can talk about what aspirin dose is right for you. Low doses of aspirin — about 75 to 100 milligrams (mg), but most commonly 81 mg — can help prevent heart attack or stroke. The daily dose for aspirin therapy is usually between 75 mg and 325 mg.
If you are on daily aspirin therapy, do not stop taking aspirin until you talk with your healthcare professional.
Stopping daily aspirin therapy suddenly may trigger a blood clot and lead to a heart attack.
Always tell your healthcare team about all the medicines you take, including those bought without a prescription.
Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Motrin IB, Advil, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve), can thin the blood. This makes it hard for blood to clot. Regular use of ibuprofen and naproxen sodium can increase the risk of bleeding. Taking aspirin with some NSAIDs can increase the risk of bleeding even more.
Some NSAIDs also increase the risk of heart attacks. If you have a reason to use low-dose aspirin — such as a history of a heart attack or bypass surgery — NSAIDs cannot be used instead of aspirin to prevent heart attacks.
Aspirin, ibuprofen and naproxen sodium also may cause stomach ulcers. The risk of ulcers goes up a lot if you take aspirin and one of these other medicines together.
If you need to take ibuprofen or similar medicines, talk with your healthcare professional about options that won't interfere with daily aspirin therapy. For example, acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may be an option.
Side effects and complications of taking daily aspirin include:
If you're taking aspirin and you need surgery or dental work, tell the healthcare professional. You and your healthcare team may need to take steps to prevent excessive bleeding. Don't stop taking a daily aspirin without talking to the healthcare professional that prescribed it.
Sometimes, a healthcare professional might recommend combining low-dose aspirin with a prescription blood thinner. Such combination therapy always needs to be carefully discussed. The combination may greatly increase the risk of major bleeding.
Other medicines that can interact with aspirin and may increase bleeding risks include:
Some herbal and dietary supplements also can increase the bleeding risk when combined with aspirin. These include:
Drinking alcohol while on daily aspirin therapy may increase the risk of stomach bleeding. Talk with your healthcare professional about how much alcohol is safe to drink. If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men.
Yes. Taking aspirin during a heart attack is safe and recommended. If you think you're having a heart attack, call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Aspirin alone won't save your life if you're having a heart attack.
When you call for help, the emergency operator may tell you to chew an aspirin. The operator first asks if you have an aspirin allergy or other health condition that would make taking an aspirin unsafe. It's OK to chew an aspirin if your healthcare professional has previously told you to do so if you think you're having a heart attack. But always call 911 or emergency medical help first.
Coated aspirin also is called enteric-coated aspirin. It is made to pass through the stomach and not dissolve until it reaches the small intestine. Coated aspirin may be gentler on the stomach. It may be appropriate for some people who take a daily aspirin, especially those with a history of gastrointestinal inflammation or ulcers.
But there's no evidence that taking coated aspirin lowers the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. Also, coated aspirin may not work as well as plain aspirin when taken at the time of a possible heart attack. Talk with your healthcare professional if you're concerned about your bleeding risk.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.