Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Belly fat can be a serious problem. Find out what causes belly fat, the health risks it poses and what you can do to lose the extra pounds.
Carrying a few extra pounds isn't uncommon, especially as people get older. But those pounds can lead to serious health risks. That's particularly true if the weight is in the form of belly fat.
Subcutaneous fat is belly fat you can feel if you pinch extra skin and tissue around your middle. Visceral fat is fat that builds up deep within the abdomen in the space around the organs. Too much visceral fat is strongly linked with a higher risk of serious health problems.
Subcutaneous fat is belly fat you can feel if you pinch extra skin and tissue around your middle. Visceral fat is fat that builds up deep within the abdomen in the space around the organs. Too much visceral fat is strongly linked with a higher risk of serious health problems.
The trouble with belly fat is that it's not limited to the layer of padding just below the skin. That's called subcutaneous fat. Belly fat also includes visceral fat. And that lies deep inside the abdomen and surrounds the internal organs.
Regardless of a person's overall weight, having a large amount of belly fat raises the risk of:
How much a person weighs depends in large part on four things:
People who regularly eat and drink more calories than they burn each day are more likely to gain extra weight, including belly fat.
Getting older also makes a difference. People lose muscle as they age. And the problem is worse for those who are not physically active. Loss of muscle mass decreases how quickly the body uses calories. That can make it more challenging to maintain a healthy weight. For example, when men are in their 50s, they need about 200 fewer calories a day than they do when they are in their 30s.
Genes can contribute to an individual's chances of being overweight or obese too. It also plays a role in where the body stores fat.
Drinking alcohol can lead to what's sometimes called a beer belly, but beer alone isn't to blame. Drinking too much alcohol of any kind can add to the problem. If you drink alcohol, do so only in moderation. For men, that means up to two drinks a day. The less a person drinks, the fewer calories, and the less likely belly fat will build up over time.
To see if your belly fat is a concern, measure your waist:
For men, a waist measurement of more than 40 inches (102 centimeters) signals an unhealthy amount of belly fat and a higher risk of health problems. In general, though, the greater the waist measurement, the higher the health risks.
You can strengthen and tone abdominal muscles with crunches or other exercises focused on your belly. But doing those exercises alone won't get rid of belly fat. The good news is that visceral fat responds to the same diet and exercise strategies that can help get rid of other extra pounds and lower total body fat. Try these tips:
Losing belly fat takes effort and patience. To lose extra fat and keep it from coming back, aim for slow and steady weight loss. Ask your health care provider for help getting started and staying on track.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.