Your healthcare professional reviews your medical history, your risk factors for preterm labor and your symptoms. If you have regular uterine contractions and your cervix starts to soften, thin and open, called dilate, before 37 weeks of pregnancy, you likely are in preterm labor.
Tests and procedures to diagnose preterm labor include:
If you're at risk of preterm labor, your healthcare team may suggest ways to keep labor from starting too soon.
During a procedure called cervical cerclage, the cervix is stitched closed with strong sutures. Most often, a member of your healthcare team removes the sutures after 36 weeks of pregnancy. If needed, the sutures can be removed earlier.
Cervical cerclage may be used for people who are less than 24 weeks pregnant, who have a history of early premature birth, and who have a cervix that is opening or a cervical length that is less than 25 millimeters, called a short cervix.
For a short cervix diagnosed before 24 weeks of pregnancy, progesterone that goes into the vagina might lower the risk of preterm birth.
No medicines or surgeries can stop labor, except briefly. But your healthcare team might suggest the following medicines:
Tocolytics. These medicines can slow contractions for a while. Tocolytics can delay preterm labor for 48 hours. This delay can give corticosteroids time to work. Or, if needed, the delay gives you time to get to a hospital that can treat premature babies.
Tocolytics don't treat the cause of preterm labor. And they don't improve the outcomes for babies. You won't get a tocolytic if you have certain conditions, such as pregnancy-induced high blood pressure, called preeclampsia.
If you're at risk of preterm labor and you're not in a hospital, you might need to see your healthcare team weekly or more often. This is so your team can watch for symptoms of preterm labor.
Preterm contractions might be Braxton Hicks contractions. These are common. They don't mean that your cervix has started to open. If you feel contractions, try walking, resting or changing positions. This might stop Braxton Hicks contractions. If you're in true preterm labor, the contractions keep going.
Bed rest to manage preterm labor has not been shown to lower the risk of preterm birth. Bed rest can lead to blood clots, emotional distress and muscle weakness.
If you're at risk of preterm labor or premature birth, you might worry during your pregnancy. You might worry more if you have a history of preterm labor or premature birth. Talk with your healthcare team about ways to relax and stay calm.
If you have symptoms of preterm labor, contact your healthcare professional right away. You might need medical care right away.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Before your appointment, you might want to:
Some basic questions to ask your healthcare team include:
Be sure to ask all the questions you have.
Preterm labor puts your baby at risk. Work with your healthcare team to improve your chance of a healthy outcome.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.