Esophageal spasms are painful contractions in the muscular tube connecting the mouth and stomach, called the esophagus. Esophageal spasms can feel like sudden, bad chest pain that lasts from a few minutes to hours. Some people may mistake it for heart pain, also called angina.
Esophageal spasms usually happen only now and then, and they might not need treatment. But sometimes the spasms happen a lot and can prevent food and liquids from traveling through the esophagus. If esophageal spasms affect the ability to eat or drink, treatments are available.
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the mouth and the stomach. Rings of muscle contract and relax to allow food and liquids to pass through the upper and lower portions.
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the mouth and the stomach. Rings of muscle contract and relax to allow food and liquids to pass through the upper and lower portions.
The squeezing chest pain that happens with esophageal spasms also can be caused by a heart attack. If you have squeezing chest pain, seek medical care right away.
It's not clear what causes esophageal spasms. However, they appear to be related to abnormal functioning of nerves that control the muscles used when swallowing.
A healthy esophagus moves food into the stomach through a series of coordinated muscle contractions. Esophageal spasms make it difficult for the muscles in the walls of the lower esophagus to coordinate. This makes it harder for the muscles to move food to the stomach.
There are two types of esophageal spasms — distal esophageal spasm and hypercontractile esophagus, also known as nutcracker esophagus.
Risk factors for esophageal spasms include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.