Your healthcare professional can diagnose moles by looking at your skin. During a skin exam, your healthcare professional looks at your skin from head to toe. If your healthcare professional thinks that a mole may be cancerous, it is removed and sent to a lab for examination under a microscope. This is called a biopsy.
You might choose to make a skin exam a regular part of your preventive medical care. Talk with your healthcare professional about the schedule that's right for you.
Most moles don't need treatment. If you're self-conscious about a mole, you could try makeup to help hide it. If you have a hair growing from a mole, you might try clipping it close to the skin's surface or plucking it. Anytime you cut or irritate a mole, keep the area clean. See your healthcare professional if a mole doesn't heal.
You also might talk with your dermatologist about surgically removing a mole if it bothers you or if you notice suspicious changes in it. Mole removal is a quick procedure that is typically done on an outpatient basis. During mole removal, your healthcare professional numbs the area around the mole and cuts it out, along with a margin of healthy skin if needed. The procedure may leave a permanent scar. People with Black skin are at increased risk of other surgical side effects, such as pigmentary changes where the cut is, and keloid scars, which are raised scars after an injury heals.
If you notice that a mole has grown back, see your healthcare professional promptly.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you have a mole that concerns you, your healthcare professional typically can let you know if it's normal or needs to be studied more. Your healthcare professional may send you to a doctor who specializes in skin disorders, known as a dermatologist, for diagnosis and treatment.
It's a good idea to arrive for your appointment well-prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready.
For moles, some basic questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask questions during your appointment.
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you several questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.