Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Leg and foot swelling during air travel is common. It's usually harmless. The most likely reason for it is sitting for a long time without moving during a flight.
Sitting with the feet on the floor for a long time causes blood to pool in the leg veins. The position of the legs while seated also increases pressure in the leg veins. This plays a role in swelling by causing fluid to leave the blood and move into the surrounding soft tissues.
A dangerous blood clot called deep vein thrombosis (DVT) sometimes causes leg swelling. But the risk of getting DVT on an airplane is very low for healthy people, especially on flights that last under four hours. In general, the chance of getting DVT starts to rise on flights over 12 hours.
You can reduce foot and leg swelling, and lower your risk of blood clots, by wearing compression stockings on a long flight. The stockings apply pressure to the lower legs.
If you notice swelling in one leg that doesn't go away or starts within two weeks of a long flight, get a health care checkup right away. The swelling might be a symptom of DVT or another condition that needs treatment. If you have a higher risk of blood clots, talk with a member of your health care team before you fly.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.