Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
It's helpful to include stretching in your exercise plan. Stretching can increase flexibility and improve the range of motion in your joints. Being more flexible can help you move more freely and be better able do daily activities. And the flexibility you gain from stretching might protect you from injury.
Balance exercises, such as balancing on one foot, can help prevent and cut the risk of injury from falls too.
Before stretching, warm up with 5 to 10 minutes of light activity. It's usually best to stretch after a workout. Keep stretches gentle and slow. Don't bounce. Breathe through your stretches. If you feel pain, you've stretched too far.
Stretch until you feel a slight pull. Then hold the stretch for about 30 seconds. Repeat the stretch on both sides 2 to 4 times. Aim to stretch major muscle groups in your body at least 2 to 3 days a week.
 If you have health conditions or injuries, talk to a healthcare professional or physical therapist about which stretches are right for you.
The calf muscle runs along the back of the lower leg. To stretch the calf muscles:
To deepen the stretch, slightly bend your right knee as you bend your left leg forward.
The hamstring muscle runs along the back of the upper leg. To stretch the hamstring muscles:
As your flexibility increases, increase the stretch by gradually scooting yourself closer to the wall or door frame.
The quadriceps muscle runs along the front of the thigh. To stretch the quadriceps muscles:
The hip flexors allow you to lift your knees and flex at your waist. These muscles are found on the upper thighs, just below the hip bones. To stretch your hip flexors:
The iliotibial band (ITB) is a band of tissue that runs outside the hip, thigh and knee. To stretch the ITB:
The knee-to-chest stretch focuses on the muscles of the lower back. If you have osteoporosis, avoid this stretch because it may increase the risk of compression fractures in the back bones.
If the back of your shoulder is tight, you can have rotator cuff problems. These problems are more likely if you golf or play overhead racket or throwing sports, such as tennis or baseball. To keep your shoulders flexible:
The shoulder's internal rotators are part of the group of muscles often used in overhead sports activities. These activities can include a tennis serve or an overhead throw. To stretch these muscles:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.