Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A fever is a common sign of illness. But that doesn't always mean it's a bad thing. In fact, fevers may help fight infections. So should you treat a fever or let the fever run its course? Here's help knowing what to do.
These suggestions are for people who don't have serious health issues. That means they don't have a suppressed immune system, aren't taking chemotherapy medicines and haven't recently had surgery.
Listed in the table below are temperatures taken with rectal and oral thermometers. These thermometers give the best measure of core body temperature.
Other types of thermometers include ear thermometers, called tympanic membrane thermometers, and forehead thermometers, called temporal artery thermometers. They're easy to use, but they don't measure temperature as well.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.