Your healthcare professional can probably make a diagnosis of polymorphous light eruption based on a physical exam and your answers to questions. You might undergo laboratory tests in order to confirm a diagnosis or rule out other conditions. Tests may include:
Your healthcare professional might need to rule out other disorders characterized by light-induced skin reactions. These conditions include:
Treatment of polymorphous light eruption often isn't needed because the rash usually goes away on its own within 10 days. If your symptoms are severe, your healthcare professional may prescribe anti-itch medicine (a corticosteroid cream or pill).
Your healthcare professional may suggest phototherapy to prevent seasonal episodes of polymorphous light eruption if you have disabling symptoms. This exposes the skin to small doses of UVA or UVB light that helps your skin be less sensitive to light. It mimics the increased exposure you would experience during a summer.
Try these self-care measures to help ease your symptoms:
To lessen the likelihood of recurring episodes of polymorphous light eruption, take the following precautions:
Cover up. For protection from the sun, wear tightly woven clothing that covers your arms and legs. Consider wearing a broad-brimmed hat, which provides more protection than does a cap or visor.
Consider wearing clothing designed to provide sun protection. Look for clothes labeled with an ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) of 40 to 50. Follow care instructions on the label of UV-blocking clothes to maintain their protective feature.
You're likely to start by seeing your primary care doctor. You may be referred to a specialist in skin diseases (dermatologist).
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For polymorphous light eruption, some basic questions to ask your healthcare team include:
Your healthcare team will ask you a number of questions about your symptoms and your medical history, such as:
Avoid sun exposure whenever possible. If you can't avoid the sun, use a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30 in areas that cannot be protected by clothing. Apply it generously 15 minutes before sun exposure. Reapply it every two hours or more often if you're swimming or sweating. This won't totally protect you from a reaction, as ultraviolet A may penetrate through most sunscreens.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.