Ciprofloxacin is used to treat bacterial infections in many different parts of the body. Ciprofloxacin oral liquid and tablets are also used to treat anthrax infection after inhalational exposure. This medicine is also used to treat and prevent plague (including pneumonic and septicemic plague). Ciprofloxacin may mask or delay the symptoms of syphilis. It is not effective against syphilis infections. 
Ciprofloxacin extended-release tablets are only used to treat urinary tract infections, including acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis. 
Proquin® XR tablets are only used to treat uncomplicated or simple urinary tract infections (acute cystitis). 
Ciprofloxacin belongs to the class of drugs known as quinolone antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria or preventing their growth. However, this medicine will not work for colds, flu, or other virus infections. 
This medicine is available only with your doctor's prescription. 
This product is available in the following dosage forms:
In deciding to use a medicine, the risks of taking the medicine must be weighed against the good it will do. This is a decision you and your doctor will make. For this medicine, the following should be considered:
Tell your doctor if you have ever had any unusual or allergic reaction to this medicine or any other medicines. Also tell your health care professional if you have any other types of allergies, such as to foods, dyes, preservatives, or animals. For non-prescription products, read the label or package ingredients carefully.
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated pediatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of ciprofloxacin in children. However, because of this medicine's toxicity, it should be used with caution, after other medicines have been considered and found ineffective. Ciprofloxacin oral liquid or tablet may be used in children to prevent anthrax infection after possible exposure, and to treat serious kidney infections. 
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of ciprofloxacin extended-release tablets in the pediatric population. Safety and efficacy have not been established. 
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated geriatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of ciprofloxacin in the elderly. However, elderly patients are more likely to have age-related kidney or heart problems, or develop severe tendon problems (including tendon rupture), which may require caution in patients receiving ciprofloxacin. 
There are no adequate studies in women for determining infant risk when using this medication during breastfeeding. Weigh the potential benefits against the potential risks before taking this medication while breastfeeding.
Although certain medicines should not be used together at all, in other cases two different medicines may be used together even if an interaction might occur. In these cases, your doctor may want to change the dose, or other precautions may be necessary. When you are taking this medicine, it is especially important that your healthcare professional know if you are taking any of the medicines listed below. The following interactions have been selected on the basis of their potential significance and are not necessarily all-inclusive.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines is not recommended. Your doctor may decide not to treat you with this medication or change some of the other medicines you take.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines is usually not recommended, but may be required in some cases. If both medicines are prescribed together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use one or both of the medicines.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines may cause an increased risk of certain side effects, but using both drugs may be the best treatment for you. If both medicines are prescribed together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use one or both of the medicines.
Certain medicines should not be used at or around the time of eating food or eating certain types of food since interactions may occur.  Using alcohol or tobacco with certain medicines may also cause interactions to occur.  The following interactions have been selected on the basis of their potential significance and are not necessarily all-inclusive.
Using this medicine with any of the following may cause an increased risk of certain side effects but may be unavoidable in some cases. If used together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use this medicine, or give you special instructions about the use of food, alcohol, or tobacco.
The presence of other medical problems may affect the use of this medicine. Make sure you tell your doctor if you have any other medical problems, especially:
Take this medicine only as directed by your doctor. Do not take more of it, do not take it more often, and do not take it for a longer time than your doctor ordered. 
This medicine comes with a Medication Guide. Read and follow the instructions carefully. Ask your doctor if you have any questions. 
This medicine works best when there is a constant amount in the blood or urine. To help keep the amount constant, do not miss any doses. Also, it is best to take the doses at evenly spaced times, day and night. For example, if you are to take one dose a day, try to take it at the same time each day. 
If you need to take this medicine for anthrax infection, your doctor will want you to begin using it as soon as possible after you are exposed to anthrax. 
You may swallow the Cipro® tablet whole or break it in half at the score line. Do not crush or chew it. Tell your doctor if you have trouble swallowing the tablet. 
Swallow the extended-release tablet whole. Do not crush, split, or chew it. 
Shake the oral liquid for at least 15 seconds just before each use. The oral liquid has small microcapsules floating in it. These microcapsules may look like bubbles or small beads. Do not chew the microcapsules when you take the oral liquid. Measure the oral liquid with the marked measuring spoon that comes with the bottle. 
You may take this medicine with or without food. However, Proquin® XR tablets should be taken with a main meal, preferably the evening meal. 
Drink plenty of fluids while you are using this medicine. Drinking extra water will help prevent some unwanted effects of ciprofloxacin. 
Do not take this medicine alone with milk, yogurt, or other dairy products. Do not drink any juice with calcium added when you take this medicine. It is okay to have dairy products or juice as part of a larger meal when you take this medicine. 
If you are taking aluminum or magnesium-containing antacids, iron supplements, multivitamins, didanosine (Videx®), lanthanum carbonate (Fosrenol®), sevelamer (Renagel®), sucralfate (Carafate®), or any products containing calcium or zinc, do not take them at the same time that you take this medicine. It is best to take these medicines at least 2 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after taking ciprofloxacin. These medicines may keep ciprofloxacin from working properly. 
Keep using this medicine for the full treatment time, even if you feel better after the first few doses. Your infection may not clear up if you stop using the medicine too soon. 
The dose of this medicine will be different for different patients. Follow your doctor's orders or the directions on the label. The following information includes only the average doses of this medicine. If your dose is different, do not change it unless your doctor tells you to do so.
The amount of medicine that you take depends on the strength of the medicine. Also, the number of doses you take each day, the time allowed between doses, and the length of time you take the medicine depend on the medical problem for which you are using the medicine.
If you miss a dose of this medicine, take it as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not double doses.
If you miss a dose of the oral liquid or tablet and it is 6 hours or more until your next regular dose, take the missed dose as soon as possible, and then go back to your regular schedule. If you miss a dose and it is less than 6 hours until your next regular dose, skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the regular time. 
If you miss a dose of the extended-release tablet and it is 8 hours or more until your next regular dose, take the missed dose as soon as possible, and then go back to your regular schedule. If you miss a dose and it is less than 8 hours until your next regular dose, skip the missed dose and take your next dose at the regular time. 
Do not keep outdated medicine or medicine no longer needed.
Ask your healthcare professional how you should dispose of any medicine you do not use.
Store the medicine in a closed container at room temperature, away from heat, moisture, and direct light. Keep from freezing.
You may store the oral liquid at room temperature or in the refrigerator. Do not freeze the bottle. Do not keep the mixed oral liquid for more than 14 days. Throw away any unused liquid after 14 days. 
It is very important that your doctor check your or your child's progress while you are using this medicine. This will allow your doctor to see if the medicine is working properly and to decide if you should continue to use it. Blood and urine tests may be needed to check for unwanted effects. 
If your or your child's symptoms do not improve within a few days, or if they become worse, check with your doctor. 
Do not use this medicine if you are also taking tizanidine (Zanaflex®). Tell your doctor if you or your child are also using theophylline (Theo-Dur®) or other products that contain caffeine (eg, coffee, soda, chocolate). Using these medicines together may increase the risk for more serious side effects. 
Ciprofloxacin may rarely cause inflammation (tendinitis) or tearing of a tendon (the cord that attaches muscles to bones). This can occur while you are taking the medicine or after you finish taking it. The risk of having tendon problems may be increased if you are over 60 years of age, are using steroid medicines (eg, dexamethasone, prednisolone, prednisone, Medrol®), have severe kidney problems, have a history of tendon problems (eg, rheumatoid arthritis), or if you have received an organ transplant (eg, heart, kidney, or lung). Check with your doctor right away if you have sudden pain or swelling in a tendon after exercise (eg, ankle, back of the knee or leg, shoulder, elbow, or wrist), bruise more easily after an injury, or are unable to bear weight or move the affected area. Refrain from exercise until your doctor says otherwise. 
Tell your doctor right away if you have feeling anxious, confused, or depressed, seeing, hearing, or feeling things that are not there, seizures, severe headache, trouble sleeping, or unusual thoughts or behaviors. These may be symptoms of serious mental problems. 
This medicine may cause serious allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, which can be life-threatening and require immediate medical attention. Call your doctor right away if you or your child have a rash, itching, hives, hoarseness, trouble or swallowing, or any swelling of your hands, face, mouth, or throat after you take this medicine. 
Serious side effects can occur during treatment with this medicine and can sometimes occur without warning. However, possible warning signs include: black, tarry stools, blistering, peeling, or loosening of the skin, bloody or cloudy urine, chills, decreased urination, diarrhea, fever, joint or muscle pain, red skin lesions, often with a purple center, sores, ulcers, or white spots in the mouth or on the lips, severe stomach pain, skin rash, swelling of the face, fingers, feet, or lower legs, unusual bleeding or bruising, unusual weight gain, or yellow skin or eyes. Check with your doctor immediately if you or your child notice any of these warning signs. 
Check with your doctor right away if you have dark urine, clay-colored stools, stomach pain, or yellow eyes or skin. These maybe symptoms of a serious liver problem. 
Ciprofloxacin may lower the number of some types of blood cells in your body. Because of this, you may bleed or get infections more easily. To help with these problems, avoid being near people who are sick or have infections. Wash your hands often. Stay away from rough sports or other situations where you could be bruised, cut, or injured. Brush and floss your teeth gently. Be careful when using sharp objects, including razors and fingernail clippers. 
Ciprofloxacin may cause diarrhea, and in some cases it can be severe. It may occur 2 months or more after you or your child stop taking this medicine. Do not take any medicine to treat diarrhea without first checking with your doctor. Diarrhea medicines may make the diarrhea worse or make it last longer. If you have any questions about this or if mild diarrhea continues or gets worse, check with your doctor. 
Check with your doctor right away if you or your child start having numbness, tingling, or burning pain in your hands, arms, legs, or feet. These may be symptoms of a condition called peripheral neuropathy. 
This medicine may increase your risk for aortic aneurysm (bulge in the wall of the largest artery). Check with your doctor right away if you have sudden chest, stomach, or back pain, trouble breathing, cough, or hoarseness. 
Some people who take ciprofloxacin may become more sensitive to sunlight than they are normally. Exposure to sunlight, even for brief periods of time, may cause severe sunburn, skin rash, redness, itching, or discoloration. When you begin using this medicine:
If you have a severe reaction from the sun, check with your doctor. 
Ciprofloxacin may cause some people to become dizzy, lightheaded, drowsy, or less alert than they are normally. Do not drive or do anything else that could be dangerous until you know how this medicine affects you. If these reactions are especially bothersome, check with your doctor. 
If you are a diabetic patient taking diabetes medicine by mouth: Ciprofloxacin may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) in some patients. Symptoms of low blood sugar must be treated before they lead to unconsciousness (passing out). Different people may feel different symptoms of low blood sugar. If you experience symptoms of low blood sugar, check with your doctor right away.
Do not take other medicines unless they have been discussed with your doctor. This includes prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter [OTC]) medicines and herbal or vitamin supplements. 
Along with its needed effects, a medicine may cause some unwanted effects. Although not all of these side effects may occur, if they do occur they may need medical attention.
Check with your doctor immediately if any of the following side effects occur:
Some side effects may occur that usually do not need medical attention. These side effects may go away during treatment as your body adjusts to the medicine. Also, your health care professional may be able to tell you about ways to prevent or reduce some of these side effects. Check with your health care professional if any of the following side effects continue or are bothersome or if you have any questions about them:
Other side effects not listed may also occur in some patients. If you notice any other effects, check with your healthcare professional.
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
Drug information provided by: Merative, Micromedex®
Portions of this document last updated: July 01, 2025

Copyright: © Merative US L.P. 1973, 2025. All rights reserved. Information is for End User's use only and may not be sold, redistributed or otherwise used for commercial purposes.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our non-profit mission.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.