Dehydration occurs when the body uses or loses more fluid than it takes in. Then the body doesn't have enough water and other fluids to do its usual work. Not replacing lost fluids leads to dehydration.
Anyone can become dehydrated. But the condition is more serious for infants, children and older adults.
The most common cause of dehydration in young children is diarrhea and vomiting. Older adults have a lower volume of water in their bodies to begin with. And older adults might have conditions or take medicines, such as water pills, that increase the risk of dehydration.
Dehydration also can occur in anyone who doesn't drink enough water during hot weather. It's more likely in people who are active in the heat.
Drinking more fluids usually fixes mild to moderate dehydration. But severe dehydration needs medical treatment right away. 
Thirst isn't always a good way to tell if the body needs water. Many people, mainly older adults, don't feel thirsty until they're dehydrated. That's why it's important to increase water intake during hot weather or while ill.
The symptoms of dehydration can differ by age.
Call your family healthcare professional if you or a loved one:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Sometimes dehydration occurs for simple reasons. These include not drinking enough water. This can happen when you're sick or too busy to remember to drink enough. Or there might be no safe water to drink when traveling, hiking or camping.
In general, the higher the fever, the more severe dehydration might be. The problem is even worse when there's fever plus diarrhea and vomiting. 
Even without a fever, people who have a cold or sore throat are less likely to feel like eating or drinking. This can lead to dehydration.
Anyone can get dehydrated. But certain people are at greater risk. They include:
Adding to these problems can be illnesses such as diabetes and dementia and taking certain medicines. Some older people might not be able to get water for themselves.
Dehydration can lead to serious complications, including:
To keep from getting dehydrated, drink fluids and eat foods that hold a lot of water, such as fruits and vegetables. Don't drink fluids that have caffeine or a lot of sugar, such as sodas and some energy drinks. They can be dehydrating.
Conditions that can create a need for more fluids include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.