Back pain is one of the most common reasons people seek medical help or miss work. Back pain is a leading cause of disability worldwide.
Fortunately, measures can help prevent or relieve most back pain episodes, especially for people younger than age 60. If prevention fails, simple home treatment and using the body correctly often can heal the back within a few weeks. Surgery is rarely needed to treat back pain.
Back pain can range from a muscle ache to a shooting, burning or stabbing feeling. Also, the pain can radiate down a leg. Bending, twisting, lifting, standing or walking can make pain worse.
Most back pain improves over time with home treatment and self-care, often within a few weeks. Contact your healthcare professional for back pain that:
In some people, back pain can signal a serious medical problem. This is rare, but seek immediate care for back pain that:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Back pain often develops without a cause that shows up in a test or an imaging study. Conditions commonly linked to back pain include:
Anyone can develop back pain, even children and teens. These factors can increase the risk of developing back pain:
Improving one's physical condition and learning and practicing how to use the body might help prevent back pain.
Avoid movements that twist or strain the back. To use the body properly:
Because back pain is common, many products promise prevention or relief. But there's no good evidence that special shoes, shoe inserts, back supports or specially designed furniture can help.
In addition, there doesn't appear to be one type of mattress that's best for people with back pain. It's probably a matter of what feels most comfortable to each person.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.