Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Making the decision to have prostate cancer screening depends on a variety of factors. Here are some tips that can help you make a good decision.
Deciding whether to have prostate cancer screening isn't always an easy decision.
Prostate cancer screening can help find prostate cancer early, when treatment is most effective. This seems like a good reason to get screened. But prostate cancer screening isn't perfect. It can lead to more tests and some tests are invasive. Sometimes you have these other tests and they don't find cancer. Sometimes the tests find a cancer that grows slowly and might never actually hurt you. This might lead to cancer treatments that may not have been necessary.
Ultimately, whether to have prostate cancer screening is a decision you make with your healthcare professional. A health professional who understands your health history can help you understand what's best for you based on your risk factors and your personal preferences. Healthcare professionals often call this "shared decision-making."
Here's information to help you get ready to talk with your healthcare professional about prostate cancer screening.
The prostate gland sits just below the bladder. It surrounds the top part of the tube that drains urine from the bladder, called the urethra. The prostate's main job is to make the fluid that feeds and carries sperm, called seminal fluid. The prostate is part of the male reproductive system.
The prostate gland sits just below the bladder. It surrounds the top part of the tube that drains urine from the bladder, called the urethra. The prostate's main job is to make the fluid that feeds and carries sperm, called seminal fluid. The prostate is part of the male reproductive system.
Prostate cancer screening is testing that looks for prostate cancer in someone who doesn't have any symptoms. The goal is to find prostate cancer when it's small and most likely to be cured.
Prostate cancer is a growth of cells that starts in the prostate. The prostate is a small gland that helps make semen. It's found just below the bladder. The prostate is part of the male reproductive system.
During a digital rectal exam, a healthcare professional inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum. The health professional feels the prostate gland for anything concerning in the texture, shape or size of the gland.
During a digital rectal exam, a healthcare professional inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum. The health professional feels the prostate gland for anything concerning in the texture, shape or size of the gland.
Prostate cancer screening often involves a blood test. Sometimes it also includes an exam of the prostate by a healthcare professional.
Tests used for prostate cancer screening include:
These tests may be repeated at regular intervals to watch for any changes over time.
Some people have a greater risk of prostate cancer. They may be more likely to benefit from prostate cancer screening. Knowing the risk factors for prostate cancer can help you determine if or when you want to begin prostate cancer screening. The main risk factors include:
Most medical organizations recommend talking with a healthcare professional about the pros and cons of prostate cancer screening. The discussion should include a review of your risk factors and your preferences about screening. For people with an average risk of prostate cancer, experts suggest talking with a healthcare professional about prostate cancer screening around age 50.
For those with an increased risk of prostate cancer, consider talking about prostate cancer screening sooner, around age 40. People with an increased risk include Black people and those with a family history of prostate cancer in a first-degree relative, such as a father or brother. Your healthcare professional can discuss other risk factors with you.
If you choose to have prostate cancer screening, most organizations recommend stopping the screening around age 70 or if you develop other serious medical conditions that limit your life expectancy. However, some people continue with screening beyond age 70 depending on their overall health.
There are pros and cons to prostate cancer screening.
Benefits of prostate cancer screening include:
Limitations and potential harms to prostate cancer screening include:
Talk with your healthcare team about the pros and cons of prostate cancer screening. Your care team can help you understand what's best for you. Then you can make a decision about if or when to have prostate cancer screening.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.