Cognitive behavioral therapy, also called CBT, is a common type of talk therapy. This type of talk therapy is also called psychotherapy. During CBT, you work with a mental health professional such as a psychologist or other licensed therapist in a structured way. You attend a limited number of sessions. CBT helps you become aware of thinking patterns that may be creating issues in your life. Looking at the relationship between your thoughts, feelings and behaviors helps you view challenging situations more clearly and respond to them in a more effective way.
CBT can be a very helpful tool in treating many mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, also called PTSD, or an eating disorder. Sometimes CBT is the only treatment needed. Other times it's used along with other therapies or treatments such as medicines.
You don't need to have a mental health condition to benefit from CBT. CBT can be an effective way to learn how to better manage stressful life situations.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is used to treat a wide range of mental health concerns. It's often the preferred type of psychotherapy because it can quickly help you learn about and cope with specific challenges. CBT generally includes fewer sessions than other types of therapy and is done in a structured way. CBT often involves homework as a way to practice your skills.
CBT is a useful tool for learning ways to deal with emotional challenges. For example, CBT may help you:
Mental health conditions that may get better with CBT include:
For some people, CBT is most effective when it's done along with other treatments, such as taking antidepressants or other medicines.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
In general, there's little risk in getting cognitive behavioral therapy. But you may feel emotions that aren't comfortable at times. This is because CBT can cause you to explore painful feelings, emotions and experiences. You may cry, get upset or feel angry during a challenging session. You also may feel physically drained. These reactions tend to get easier to tolerate over time as you practice your skills.
With some forms of CBT, such as exposure therapy, you may need to face situations you'd rather avoid, such as airplanes if you have a fear of flying. This can lead to short-term stress or anxiety.
However, working with a skilled therapist can lower any risks. The coping skills you learn can help you manage and conquer negative feelings and fears.
You may decide on your own that you want to try cognitive behavioral therapy. Or a healthcare professional or someone else may suggest CBT to you. Here's how to get started:
Psychotherapist is a general term. It isn't a job title and doesn't suggest a specific type of education, training or licensure. Examples of psychotherapists include psychiatrists, psychologists, licensed professional counselors, licensed social workers, licensed marriage and family therapists, psychiatric nurses, and other licensed professionals with mental health training.
The key is to find a skilled therapist who can match the kind of therapy with your needs.
Cognitive behavioral therapy may be done one-on-one or in groups with family members or with people who have like issues. Online resources are available that may make getting CBT possible even if you live in an area with few local mental health resources.
At your first session, your therapist gathers information about you and asks what concerns you'd like to work on. The therapist asks you about your current and past physical and emotional health to get a deeper understanding of your situation. Your therapist may talk with you about whether you might benefit from other treatment as well, such as medicines.
The first session also is a chance to interview your therapist to see if you and the therapist are a good match. Make sure you understand:
It might take a few sessions for your therapist to fully understand your situation and concerns and to decide on the best course of action. If you don't feel comfortable with the first therapist you see, try someone else. Having a good "fit" with your therapist can help you get the most benefit from CBT.
Your therapist encourages you to talk about your thoughts and feelings and what's troubling you. Don't worry if you find it hard to open up about your feelings. Your therapist can help you gain more confidence and feel more comfortable sharing.
CBT generally focuses on specific issues, using an approach that sets goals. As you go through the therapy process, your therapist may ask you to do homework. Homework may include activities, reading or practices that build on what you learn during your regular therapy sessions. This encourages you to apply what you're learning in your daily life. The homework is designed to help you reach your treatment goals.
Your therapist's approach depends on your situation and what you want. Your therapist may mix CBT with another approach. For example, your therapist may add interpersonal therapy that focuses on your relationships with other people.
CBT is generally short-term therapy. It may range from about 5 to 20 sessions. You and your therapist can talk about how many sessions may be right for you. Factors to think about include:
Except in very specific circumstances, talks with your therapist are confidential. That means they're kept private between you and your therapist. A therapist may break confidentiality if there is a current threat to safety or when required by state or federal law to report concerns to authorities. These situations include if you:
Cognitive behavioral therapy may not cure your condition or make a situation that's not pleasant go away. But it can give you the power to cope with your situation in a healthy way and to feel better about yourself, your life and your future.
CBT doesn't work for everyone. But you can take steps to get the most out of your therapy and help make it a success.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.