Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight-Loss Medications Edition
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Living Well / What is CoolSculpting and is it safe?
With beauty technology constantly evolving, it is critical to pay attention to what can be problematic or lead to serious side effects. When it comes to freezing fat through CoolSculpting, consideration for its efficacy and potential side effects should be weighed. The technology has recently made headlines.
According to a recent investigation by The New York Times that involved analyzing “internal documents, lawsuits, medical studies, and interviews,” it appears that the potential risk of a side effect resulting in unwanted fat growth — which can only be treated through surgery — may have been previously underestimated.
CoolSculpting is the brand name for cryolipolysis (CLL), a fat-freezing method to reduce fat thickness in treated areas, explains Basel Sharaf, M.D., practice chair for the Center for Aesthetic Medicine & Surgery at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
“CLL is a noninvasive body contouring approach based on the hypothesis that fat cells (adipocytes) are sensitive to cold temperature. Through controlled cooling, selective destruction of fat cells can be achieved due to cold-induced apoptosis (fat cell death). Initially, there is an inflammatory response followed by reduction in fat cells in the treated area over a three-month period,” says Dr. Sharaf. This technology promised reduction of unwanted fatty deposits in certain areas of the body without having surgery, hence its appeal to the public.
Dr. Sharaf says that CoolSculpting treatment can take 35 minutes to 1 hour per treatment area. If more treatment areas are desired, then it may take several hours. The treatments are usually repeated within 1 to 3 months, and it involves an average 2 to 3 treatments per area. Additionally, up to 4 treatment areas — such as the abdomen and flanks — can be done at the same time.
In addition to the abdomen, the FDA has cleared CLL for the treatment of fat under the chin, under the jawline, thighs, upper arm, sides of the abdomen, underneath the buttocks and on the back.
According to recent studies, the effectiveness of the treatment can be quite variable, with reported efficacy between a 10.3% and 25.5% reduction in fat thickness in treated areas.
CLL may not be nearly as effective or predictable as liposuction, which is still considered the gold standard for targeting areas of fat excess under the skin. Liposuction uses suction cannula to remove fat from specific areas of the body. The process of shaping the body with liposuction is called body contouring or liposculpture.
According to Dr. Sharaf, much of CLL’s popularity is based on the fact that it is a noninvasive body contouring procedure that can be performed without anesthesia. In contrast, liposuction is typically done through small incisions and often requires sedation or general anesthesia.
With CoolSculpting, there have been concerns for paradoxical adipose hyperplasia (PAH). This is a term used to describe fat growth — rather than shrinkage — in the treated areas of CoolSculpting. It is difficult to predict who may develop PAH after CoolSculpting. This is one of the main reasons CoolSculpting is not offered at the Center for Aesthetic Medicine & Surgery, says Dr. Sharaf.
“A key factor when choosing which approach we use is efficacy, safety and predictability of the results long term,” says Dr. Sharaf. “There are several techniques to perform safe body contouring with either liposuction alone or with energy-based devices.” In 2022, liposuction was the most commonly performed cosmetic procedure in the U.S. by board-certified plastic surgeons according to American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS). “While CLL may have potential utility in people who may not be good surgical candidates for liposuction, it’s critical that those who are considering it are aware of CLL’s efficacy and the risk of PAH,” says Dr. Sharaf.
“As with liposuction, CLL is not an alternative to weight loss,” says Dr. Sharaf. Patients have optimal cosmetic outcome after reaching ideal body weight and making healthy lifestyle changes prior to body contouring.
Like any surgical treatments, CoolSculpting has associated risks, despite its noninvasive nature.
Short-term side effects include the following and may last from hours to days:
PAH doesn’t show up right away — bulges or lumps typically appear a few months after treatment, Dr. Sharaf says. And it doesn’t go away on its own; surgery might be needed. There is still debate as to what is the best approach to address PAH.
While CoolSculpting is generally considered safe, patients who are interested in body contouring may want to consider more proven methods. There are currently many technologies and energy-based devices that are being marketed to improve body contour and reduce unwanted fat. It’s important that people are educated about these technologies, their effectiveness and side effects by their provider.
The Mayo Clinic Diabetes Diet, 3rd Edition
This adaptation of the #1 New York Times bestselling book, The Mayo Clinic Diet, provides those living with type 2 diabetes a simple and straightforward guide to losing weight and keeping it off.
Discover more Nutrition & Fitness content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Andres J. Acosta, M.D., Ph.D., Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN

      Dr. Sharaf is a consultant plastic surgeon and practice chair of the Center for Aesthetic Medicine & Surgery at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. His areas of specialization include expertise in facial aesthetic surgery and body contouring procedures.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Andres J. Acosta, M.D., Ph.D., Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.