Bradycardia, shown on the right, is a slower than typical heart rhythm that often starts in the area of the heart called the sinus node. A typical heart rhythm is shown in the image on the left.
Bradycardia, shown on the right, is a slower than typical heart rhythm that often starts in the area of the heart called the sinus node. A typical heart rhythm is shown in the image on the left.
Bradycardia (brad-e-KAHR-dee-uh) is a slow heart rate. The hearts of adults at rest usually beat between 60 and 100 times a minute. If you have bradycardia, your heart beats fewer than 60 times a minute.
Bradycardia can be a serious problem if the heart rate is very slow and the heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the body. If this happens, you may feel dizzy, very tired or weak, and short of breath. Sometimes bradycardia doesn't cause symptoms or complications.
A slow heart rate isn't always a concern. For example, a resting heart rate between 40 and 60 beats a minute is common in some people, particularly healthy young adults and trained athletes. It also is quite common during sleep.
If bradycardia is severe, a pacemaker may be needed to help the heart beat at an appropriate rate.
A slower than typical heartbeat is called bradycardia. If the slow heartbeat stops the brain and other organs from getting enough oxygen, symptoms may include:
Many things can cause symptoms of bradycardia. It's important to get a fast, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. Make an appointment for a health checkup if you are worried about a slow heart rate.
If you faint, have difficulty breathing or have chest pain lasting more than a few minutes, call 911 or emergency medical services.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.
In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.
To better understand the causes of bradycardia, it may help to know how the heart typically beats. The typical heart has four chambers.
Within the heart's upper right chamber is a group of cells called the sinus node. The sinus node is the heart's natural pacemaker. It creates the signal that starts each heartbeat. Bradycardia happens when these signals slow down or are blocked.
Things that cause changes in heart signaling that can lead to bradycardia include:
Bradycardia is often associated with damage to heart tissue from some type of heart disease. Anything that increases the risk of heart problems can increase the risk of bradycardia. Risk factors include:
Possible complications of bradycardia include:
Preventing heart disease may help lower the risk of bradycardia.
The American Heart Association recommends these steps:
It's important to have regular health checkups. If you already have heart disease, take these steps to lower your risk of irregular heartbeats:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.