The major organs in the digestive system are the liver, stomach, gallbladder, small intestine and colon.
The major organs in the digestive system are the liver, stomach, gallbladder, small intestine and colon.
Indigestion is discomfort or pain in the belly. Symptoms may include a burning pain, feeling full while eating or feeling full long after eating. Indigestion symptoms may happen once in a while or often.
Indigestion may be caused by a digestive system condition. But often, there is no clear underlying cause. Frequent or long-lasting indigestion often can be treated with changes in diet and lifestyle, mental health therapy, and medicines.
Indigestion also is called upset stomach or dyspepsia.
Sometimes people with indigestion also experience heartburn. Heartburn is a pain or burning feeling in the center of your chest during or after eating. The pain or burning feeling may radiate into your neck or back.
Mild indigestion usually is nothing to worry about. Talk with your healthcare professional if symptoms of indigestion last more than two weeks.
Get care as soon as possible if you have indigestion and these symptoms:
Get emergency care if you have indigestion-like symptoms that may be symptoms of a heart attack:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Indigestion usually has no clear underlying medical condition as a cause. Long-lasting or frequent indigestion with no clear underlying medical cause is called functional indigestion.
Many factors may contribute to or worsen functional indigestion. These include:
H. pylori bacteria can cause ulcers in the stomach or small intestine. H. pylori may contribute to indigestion even if it has not caused an ulcer.
Several conditions can cause indigestion. Underlying causes vary among different age groups.
Several factors can make it more likely for you to have symptoms even though they don't always cause indigestion:
Although indigestion doesn't usually have serious complications, it can affect your quality of life. You may eat less. You also might miss work or school because of your symptoms.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.