Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Nutrition & Fitness / Debunking the protein propaganda: How much is too much?
Nowadays you can find protein added to almost anything – pancakes, popcorn, crackers, pasta, granola, and so much more. Many people, from bodybuilders to surgery patients, are intereted in designing their diets around getting “enough” protein. But is there a chance everyone is overdoing it?
On this episode of On Nutrition, we talk with registered dietitian nutritionist Dr. Su-Nui Escobar about the best natural sources of protein, the formula to calculate how much protein our bodies actually need, and her favorite recipes for getting enough.
Listen to Debunking the protein propaganda: How much is too much?
Tara Schmidt: This is “On Nutrition,” a podcast from Mayo Clinic where we dig into the latest nutrition trends and research to help you understand what’s health and what’s hype. I’m Tara Schmidt, a registered dietician with Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. On this episode, Protein. But first we have a listener question about our episode on GLP-1s called “Beyond Ozempic.”
Estrella: My name is Estrella. Thank you for the podcast on GLP-1. I just finished listening to it, and I have a question. For those of us taking Mounjaro, or Wegovy for weight loss: Once we achieve weight loss, is the medication reduced to — instead of, say, once a week — once a month? Has that proven to be effective to avoid the weight from coming back?
Tara Schmidt: Hi, Estrella. Thanks for your question. We know that GLP-1s aren’t just for weight loss, but also for weight management. They’re intended to be long-term, maybe even for the rest of your life. Taking the medication less frequently may be an off-ramp strategy in the future, but we don’t have current evidence to support that this is effective.
As always, consult with your prescribing provider before making any changes to your medication regimen. They may suggest simply transitioning to a lower dose. And just like a medication for diabetes, cholesterol, or blood pressure, you wouldn’t likely stop taking your medication once you reached your goal.
If you’re tolerating your prescription, it may be healthier for you to continue using the GLP-1 because when people stop taking their anti-obesity medication, they generally gain back more than half of the weight they had lost. Whether you’re taking a GLP-1 or not.
Frequent dieting puts you at risk of weight regain or weight cycling, which can actually increase your chance of cardiovascular problems, including heart attack, stroke, or death from heart disease. As always, before any major weight loss attempt, talk to your doctor to find the right method for you.
If you have another follow-up question, leave us a voicemail at (507) 538-6272 and we’ll answer it in a future episode. Now onto the show.
Out of the major macronutrients — carbohydrates, fats, and proteins — we hear about protein a lot. Because in the last decade or so, the market has exploded with new ways to pack protein into our foods. There’s protein popcorn, nachos, pancakes, and plenty of powders and bars.
People point to protein as the perfect path to weight loss, muscle gain, even smoother skin. But is the hype deserved and is there a chance we might be overdoing it?
Here to pull apart the protein propaganda is Dr. Su-Nui Escobar, a Doctor in Clinical Nutrition, a registered dietician nutritionist, and the former spokesperson for the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Su-Nui counsels patients around weight loss medication, menopause, and of course the pervasive protein. Thank you so much for joining me today. It’s a pleasure to have you on “On Nutrition.”
Su-Nui Escobar: I’m so excited about this topic.
Tara Schmidt: Me too. Because protein is so wildly popular right now, especially in the gym community, but also everywhere. And recently Patrick Schwarzenegger, who as you may assume is the son of the famously muscular Arnold Schwarzenegger, had an interview where he said he keeps up his physique by drinking a 221 gram protein shake.
Every day I just start thinking about calories. I’m like, “Okay, so 221 times four we’re already at 800. That’s with no other ingredients. Where did this protein craze come from?”
Su-Nui Escobar: That’s so dietician of you to calculate the calories. It’s just a trend in general. Like it has been popular for many years, but in the last two everything is protein. We have influencers in protein. We actually have experts in higher protein. The thing is, what we consider high protein is not necessarily the same as the consumer.
Tara Schmidt: Yes. I also don’t agree with how they’re calculating it. It’s not that protein is unimportant because it’s absolutely vital. Do you want to talk about some of the functions of protein in the body and its importance?
Su-Nui Escobar: Well, I mean, it’s no surprise that among the gym community protein is the talk. Because it helps to repair and build muscle, and we are all aware of that. But it also helps with your immune system and it’s part of the hormones and enzymes of the body. If you think about it that way, it just affects every single part of our body. It’s definitely essential for our wellbeing.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about some sources of protein. We have animal sources of protein, which is really any animal meat or muscle. What about some of your favorite plants as sources of protein?
Su-Nui Escobar: I’m Hispanic. I live in Miami, so you can imagine that I love beans.
Su-Nui Escobar: Garbanzo, lentils, anything of that nature that you put in front of me, I’ll be very happy. I feel those are very versatile. You can cook it in many styles and they’re great sources of plant-based protein.
But also I really like hemp seeds and chia seeds, and other types of seeds, because they can easily add a little bit of extra protein to your breakfast. If you enjoy an oatmeal and you add a little bit of this seed, you boost the protein and it tastes great. It’s something with the crunchiness that it adds that I really enjoy. Of course, like all the soy products, I love edamame. I mean, who doesn’t?
Tara Schmidt: Yeah. My kids love edamame.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes, mine too. But also tofu and tempeh and other soy sources of plant-based protein are great.
Tara Schmidt: People simply need to become more familiar with how to use plant sources of protein. Everyone thinks you just have to eat plain beans or you’re just going to eat a block of tofu. I think that we could really increase people’s intake of plant-based proteins, but they’re not necessarily familiar with how to make it taste good as they are familiar with cooking meat and potatoes, to be frank.
Su-Nui Escobar: I agree. There’s so many ways. For example, we can make chili and chili’s pretty universal, but sometimes it can be just done completely with plant-based proteins. Beans soups are really good. We have this for dinner, or maybe breakfast, it’s just a piece of bread. Obviously, as a dietician I will say whole wheat bread and then you make your own refried beans without much fat and then you put a little bit of layer of that and then you put jalapenos or anything that you like. It’s really super easy. It is one of those foods that I know my mom made when she was lazy and she didn’t want to cook. I’m not going to call her lazy. Now that I’m a mom —
Tara Schmidt: We’re utilizing our resources.
Su-Nui Escobar: Exactly. But it tastes great. If you go to Middle Eastern countries, you might have delicious ways of making lentils. You can put it in lettuce leaves and make little tacos with that. You can make breakfast burritos with beans. There’s so many ways. Luckily, we now have the internet and we have access to thousands of recipes.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah, my family doesn’t really know any other than black bean quesadillas and enchiladas without any meat. Only because I’ve only ever made them as a vegetarian meal for our family, so they don’t really know the difference. When we are at a restaurant. We asked for black bean quesadillas and they said, “Oh, what protein do you want in there?” My kids said” “Huh?”
Tara Schmidt: Even Indian food. I make a tofu tikka masala, which is fabulous, thank you very much.
Su-Nui Escobar: You know, Indian food is naturally plant-based, so they have many recipes. I like the tikka masala with garbanzos.
Tara Schmidt: Oh yes. See, that’s another good one.
Let’s also talk about dairy. Because sometimes people think, “Okay, either I’m eating meat or I’m eating beans.” But dairy can be a great source of protein and I think our current food environment has a lot of high protein or ultra filtered sources of dairy. Do you want to talk about dairy and protein?
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes, it’s a complicated topic because some people love it, some people hate it. You will find experts that will say that dairy is a big source of inflammation. I found it very useful because when you drink, let’s say cow’s milk, you’ll have eight grams of protein.
Soy is somewhat comparable, but then other plant-based sources of milk don’t have a lot of protein. They might have a gram, they might have a couple of grams, and that’s it. Unless they’re fortified with protein. Dairy, I use it all the time — a Greek yogurt and a little bit of cottage cheese. It’s also really easy and I love the trend.
Su-Nui Escobar: It is. It’s like cottage cheese everything. I love it. The other day I had cottage cheese, a little bit of milk, berries, and a little dash of maple syrup.
Tara Schmidt: Could add some vanilla extract to that.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yeah. It does have vanilla extract. You literally are drinking your protein shake because, 25, 30 grams of protein, depending on how much of each ingredient you put in there, it almost tastes like a cheesecake.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes. The flat breads are made out of cottage cheese. There’s so many delicious recipes with cottage cheese. That’s what I think is very useful. Sometimes with plant-based products, you don’t get the same amount of protein.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah, I agree. Soy is a very close equivalent. But there was a little misunderstanding previously. It’s better now that almond milk has protein, or oat milk is going to be the equivalent. If you choose to drink those beverages, that’s fine, especially if you like them.
They’re lower in calories, but they’re also lower in calories because they don’t have the calories coming from protein, right?
Su-Nui Escobar: Exactly. It’s just a balance.
Tara Schmidt: You and I as dieticians, we don’t really care how you get your protein in. As long as we can see you have a nice balanced diet. You have your plant sources and you have your amino acids. I can handle anything. We just need to make sure that you’re getting everything in, but you don’t have to defend whether or not you do dairy to me. You can just tell me what you do and I’m going to roll with it. It’s all good.
Tara Schmidt: We’re very nice, dieticians.
Tara Schmidt: We’re not as scary as you think we are. When we talk about vegetarianism, or plant forward eating, sometimes the question becomes, “Okay, how do I get a complete protein?” Can you explain to us the difference between a complete versus an incomplete protein, or what we’re referencing when we say that term?
Su-Nui Escobar: Well, you mentioned before amino acids, which are the building blocks of proteins that our body can make, and there’s some that we need from diet. When you eat a piece of chicken, an egg, you naturally get all of those amino acids at once. Also, soy products will have those amino acids. But if you’re eating something like beans, you have to pair up with another food to have all the amino acids in one meal. But it comes very naturally and very simple. For example, rice and beans, which very often go together, make a complete protein.
A piece of bread, whole wheat, obviously with peanut butter or almond butter would make the complete proteins. It’s just sometimes even the natural ways of eating these foods will make it a complete protein.
Tara Schmidt: What is really enough protein? Because there are multiple ways, even for dieticians, that we can calculate someone’s protein needs. Let’s talk about a few of them.
Su-Nui Escobar: That’s very confusing because in the healthcare field we use kilograms, but the average person in this country, it’s going to use pounds. It makes it a little bit more complicated. But what is enough protein? According to the recommended dietary allowances, RDAs, having 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight, should cover your basic needs.
That doesn’t necessarily mean that’s all the protein that you want to eat, but at that level you don’t have any deficiencies. I tend to do more. 1.2, 1.4 because I like the high protein and for me, that’s the high protein. Then I multiply it for the kilograms of body weight. Now different people will need different amounts of protein, depending on what’s going on with them.
Tara Schmidt: We know that number can be skewed when someone has a higher body weight, right? We don’t necessarily want to feed excess fat tissue, right? When someone has a higher body weight, do I want to just use their actual weight when I’m using that calculation? Or do I want to use their ideal body weight, which we  don’t normally use outside of these types of equations? It’s complicated.
Su-Nui Escobar: It is. It’s not a straightforward answer, but for people living with obesity. Then using adjusted body weight, sometimes works, sometimes we’ll use the ideal body weight with higher protein intake. We play around based on our professional experience. Also now there’s conversations about using the fat free mass to calculate the protein needs.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes. Which is hard to get.
Tara Schmidt: Yes. From a mathematical standpoint, to calculate your body weight in kilos, you take your weight in pounds and divide by 2.2, so that gives you a weight in kilos. That’s even sometimes where I start, so I’ll say divide your weight in pounds by 2.2, and if that was the amount of protein you consumed, it would be one gram of protein per kilogram of body weight.
Again, sometimes you go to 1.2 or 1.4. Some guidelines for elderly or older adults go up to 1.5, or if we’re talking about people on GLP-1s. But again, we really always individualize it and I can’t always give a perfect answer for a million people at once. Sorry, that’s not how nutrition works.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yeah, I know. But even I want to put this out there because yes, these people that you mentioned need more protein, but not five grams per kilogram. The top that I use is two. Even that’s for someone that is really sick and really needs tons of more protein, so don’t go overboard. For most people it will not reach 200.
Tara Schmidt: Most Americans are getting adequate protein, just maybe not from the best sources. I’d like it to be known that we don’t see a lot of protein deficiency in America, we might in developing countries. But what would be a sign of protein deficiency in a patient?
Su-Nui Escobar: The hair breaking. We see these very often in people taking GLP-1s. Also fatigue. We have to remember when you eat protein, you don’t eat just protein, you eat other nutrients in that food. Along with the protein, there could be other deficiencies, such as iron deficiency that will make people really tired.
You could also see fluid retention. So you press the skin and it doesn’t bounce back quickly, but rather stays there. That could be a sign of your retaining fluid.
Tara Schmidt: Do you want to talk about what stages of life we need the most protein in?
Su-Nui Escobar: There’s a few different stages. For kids, they need more protein per kilogram of body weight because they’re making that muscle. They’re building a whole person there, right? Mothers who are expecting, they need extra protein for that baby.
The issue with older adults is that they don’t really like protein. This is where plant protein usually is very helpful. People that are losing weight rapidly just because as you lose weight, you lose both muscle and fat — you want to keep as much of that muscle as possible. One, you look better, but two, it’s easier to maintain that weight loss.
Tara Schmidt: Absolutely. You mentioned patients who are losing weight rapidly, like those who’ve had bariatric surgery or are taking GLP-1s, and we tend to treat them the same because as they lose weight quickly, they’re eating much less than before.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes. Especially right after the injections, they can barely eat. Those two, three days after, they could not stomach a piece of chicken.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah, and that’s when we go to things like a protein shake, or yogurt, or a smoothie, or cottage cheese, thinking of what’s not going to stay in the stomach as long. Even though protein has to be broken down in the stomach like all nutrients, what can be a little bit easier, or broken down faster than a piece of meat sitting in there?
Su-Nui Escobar: Exactly, or something simple to eat. You can manage to eat yogurt fairly easily. If you do Greek yogurt even better. Fourteen, 17 grams of protein, depending on the brand, in just a little cup.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah. Volume is restricted, but high in nutrients and high in protein. Protein dense, nutrient dense, small volume. And that’s exactly what we do for bariatric patients.
Tara Schmidt: Protein is an essential macronutrient made up of amino acids that help repair and build muscle, strengthen our immune system and keep the body running. It’s no wonder some people are obsessed with getting “enough.”
Obviously, some sources of protein are animal products like fish or chicken, but we tend to sleep on more plant-based sources like beans, hemp, chia seeds, edamame, tofu, tempeh, and more. There are also dairy sources like Greek yogurt and cottage cheese.
And incorporating protein doesn’t have to be boring either.There are plenty of fun and delicious recipes from cultures all around the world. Now, that’s not to say you need to eat more protein. Most Americans are already getting almost double the recommended amount.
To calculate the general amount of protein your body actually needs, multiply your body weight in kilos by 0.8 grams. A person who weighs, for example, 180 pounds or 81.6 kilos would only need about 65 grams of protein. I would only need a minimum of about 65 grams of protein a day. That’s not much.
Protein deficiency is rare in the US, but there are some populations who need more like kids, pregnant people, older adults, and those who are on a GLP-1 or have had bariatric surgery. Now, let’s talk about how the body utilizes protein and when’s the best time to have some.
There are a few numbers out there about protein utilization. Is this 200-gram protein shake worth it or not? Do we use all of the protein we consume?
Su-Nui Escobar: Not really. First, when we eat protein it takes a little bit more work for our bodies to break it down. It might take up to 30 percent just to process, digest and utilize that protein. You are already losing part of that. Honestly, if you eat too much, it’s going to happen the same as any other nutrient. Either you get rid of it or you reuse it in another way, or you store it as fat.
Tara Schmidt: A calorie is a calorie no matter which macronutrient it came from. But even if you have too much protein, which is too many calories for your caloric needs, you’re going to store it just like you would any other macronutrient.
Sometimes people think protein is unlimited. They say “I get to have whatever I want and it will just directly go to my biceps,” which is not true, unfortunately.
Su-Nui Escobar: It’s really hard to find that balance.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about collagen, which is a type of protein. I know many of us, myself included, might have a 17-step skincare routine that includes collagen, but collagen is also really important for people that are healing from surgery or people that are going into surgery. How does protein play a role in healing?
Su-Nui Escobar: Protein is essential for healing. I mean, there’s a reason why someone who has wounds for any reason. It could be because of surgery, it could be because of pressure, because they have been laying in bed for a long time and they need protein and they need calories as well to heal. I sometimes work with transplant patients. We give them a lot of protein because that’s a huge surgery, and for that to heal, they will need protein.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah, we were thinking about tissue repair. How are those tissues going to repair themselves if they don’t have the protein? When people are intentionally losing weight with a medical intervention like surgery or medication, do you have them on a higher protein diet?
Su-Nui Escobar: I personally like it. If they’re doing it with any anti-obesity medications, protein can help them feel more satisfied, more full. You eat a source of protein with veggies and a little bit of carbohydrate, like a well-balanced diet. But if you have the protein in there, you’re full for longer.
It is much easier to manage your total caloric intake throughout the day. If they’re using GLP-1s, then you know you want that protein to minimize that muscle loss.
Tara Schmidt: When we talk about the ways that we burn food, we have your metabolism, which is even burning at rest; we have the calories that you burn from movement and from exercise; but we also have what we call the thermogenic effect of food, the calories your body burns just by breaking food down. Does protein have a thermogenic effect better than other macronutrients?
Tara Schmidt: We’re going to burn more calories, eating or digesting protein.
Tara Schmidt: But not enough to burn what you’ve eaten.
Tara Schmidt: We’re not negating calories here.
Tara Schmidt: People used to call celery a calorie-burning food, and I’m like, “Oh, you’d have to eat a lot of celery to do that.” Let’s talk about satiety in protein because I think we tend to have a lot of, especially carbohydrate-centered snacks or treats, or even sometimes meals. And then we’re hungry however many minutes later. Let’s talk about how protein affects our appetite and cravings.
Su-Nui Escobar: It works on many levels. Usually when you eat protein, taking more time to eat gives your body enough time to tell your brain, “Hey, I’m full. This is enough. You can stop now.” But if you eat a piece of cake or some carbohydrates you don’t have to chew…
Su-Nui Escobar: Yeah. When do you have time for your body to tell your brain that’s enough? Then it just takes longer to digest. It takes longer to process this protein. So you feel more satisfied for longer, for a few hours after you eat.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about the timing of protein. I think that there’s some question out there of, “Okay, should it be spread evenly throughout the day? Should I have it earlier in the day?” Most, I think, people in the American population have this big chunk of protein with dinner. Is there a best time to consume protein?
Su-Nui Escobar: You have to spread it out during the day. You want some with breakfast, some with your meals, some with snacks. Breakfast is that one thing that I make emphasis on making sure that you have protein in breakfast. Because that’s the meal that people tend to be low in protein with. When you give your body too much protein at once, it just doesn’t process the same. You are not going to get the most out of it.
Tara Schmidt: “Utilization” is the word I use. I don’t think you can’t utilize a hundred grams of protein at once.
Su-Nui Escobar: No, it will be hard. And what I see most is that lunch and dinner are easy to get enough protein. For snacks and breakfast, it’s really hard because it’s something that you have to really think about to get enough.
Tara Schmidt: They’re not as easily accessible sometimes. If you think about what’s in your pantry or what’s in your cupboard, they tend to be shelf-stable carbohydrates, or things with higher sugar, or even sometimes higher fat versus proteins. Sometimes they are more often in the fridge or take a little bit more time to create.
Su-Nui Escobar: Mornings are hectic in this house. I have an 8-year-old. I just leave milk for him. We have some frozen berries, frozen fruits all the time. Then a little bit of peanut butter powder.
He makes his shake himself. A little bit of milk, a little bit of fruit, a little bit of peanut butter, and that’s it. It takes three seconds and it’s enough protein for him, and then I send him to school with another lunch that will include protein.
Tara Schmidt: We have heard the claim that you should eat protein right before bed to encourage muscle growth while you rest. True or false?
Su-Nui Escobar: I never read any scientific literature about it, so it’s something that I’m not going to recommend, especially because if you eat too much at night, it might sit very heavy and might make it really hard for you to sleep. Honestly, sleeping is one of the best things that we can do for our health. And even for weight loss, sleeping is key.
Now you want to keep your blood sugar stable, for example, if I have a patient with diabetes — then I would recommend a small snack with protein right before bed.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah. The only literature that I had read was related to patients with liver cirrhosis, but nothing is going to grow your muscles. Unless you’re actually challenging your muscles and you’re having those small tears. Eating — I don’t care how many grams of protein you have — it is not going to grow muscles. That’s not how muscles work, unfortunately.
Su-Nui Escobar: Yes. I wish that it was as simple as eating some protein at night.
Tara Schmidt: Some listeners might be worried about the side effects of eating a lot of animal protein. Can we talk about the specific types of protein that are linked to cancer?
Su-Nui Escobar: Eating processed proteins such as sausage, bacon, or the proteins that we’ll get in fast food — that is linked to cancer.
Tara Schmidt: It’s more about ultra-processed, especially meats or red meats, not protein itself.
Tara Schmidt: What about with exercise? Do you have your patients make sure that they have a source of protein within a few hours after exercising, or do you have them have a shake before or during? What’s your prescription for your athletes?
Su-Nui Escobar: Well, for that, yes, they do need protein in the next two hours after they exercise. If they’re going to have a meal right after exercise, then they don’t have to worry about it because they’re going to have that protein, but they also need a little bit of carbohydrates.
They will need both to be able to repair that muscle and recover a little faster. Before, what they need most is some energy for them to be able to actually work out at their maximum level. I’m not talking about athletes here, I am just talking about normal people trying your average gym.
Now if you’re going to do 20 minutes of low intensity exercise, I will not worry.
Tara Schmidt: You don’t need a protein shake after that.
Tara Schmidt: Because you’re probably going to consume more calories than you even burned.
Tara Schmidt: First things first: Our bodies don’t use all the protein we consume. Yes, your body may burn some calories digesting protein, but any excess either gets used or stored as fat. The good news is protein does help satiate hunger, so a little bit goes a long way to help you stay fuller, longer.
When it comes to the best time to eat protein, spread it throughout the day in your meals and snacks, and make sure to have some protein within two hours of a high intensity workout to help with muscle repair and recovery. Collagen is a type of protein essential for healing, so your doctor might recommend you eat more than usual when you’re recovering from surgery.
Unless you’re eating a ton of ultra-processed meats, you probably don’t need to worry about developing cancer solely because you prioritize protein. Now let’s get into whether certain protein products deserve the hype and sustainable ways to source your protein.
I would love to get your take on a few processed protein sources and kind of see if you think they have enough nutritional value. Does that sound fair?
Su-Nui Escobar: They have a place, they’re obviously processed. So you’d rather have real foods and processed foods, but honestly they’re very convenient. You can bring it with you anywhere. Especially my patients that need small, frequent meals such as people in GLP-1s. Then they can carry it with them, and eat it.
Someone that has cancer and cannot eat huge amounts of food and they’re mobile because they’re not confined to a hospital bed —  it could be helpful. But we need to look into how much sugar they have, how much protein they have, what other nutrients they have? What is the source of sugar?
Because some of these protein bars that you think are healthy, they’re not. They might have 25 grams of sugar, or they have sugar alcohols that when you eat it will upset your stomach.
Tara Schmidt: Or the added fiber that some of these bars can wreak havoc.
Tara Schmidt: We’re also seeing things like protein fortified-pasta and oatmeal.  Bread and coffee. What are your thoughts?
Su-Nui Escobar: Everything is fortified nowadays.
I mean, I like it in a sense, but then I don’t like it at the same time. Because again, we don’t need that much protein. For many people anywhere between, I will say —  60 grams the minimum and a hundred and something, the maximum amount of grams — that will be enough.
But let’s say you really like to have your oatmeal in the morning, having a fortified oatmeal with protein will give you the protein that you need and you’re still eating your nice oatmeal that you enjoy. It’s more of that: What else are you eating to see if you really need it or not?
A kid that does not like any protein — and I don’t know if your kids went through that phase where they did not want to eat any protein, then you do the fortified pasta.
Su-Nui Escobar: And, you know, you’ve at least given them something.
Tara Schmidt: Or if they’re vegetarian or vegan. My question would be, do you need these products to reach your protein goal? Or are you having pasta with six meatballs? You probably don’t need fortified pasta.
Tara Schmidt: Do you have a favorite type of powder that people use? We have whey, pea protein, chia, and hemp. They all have different price points. By the way, I look at added sugar, as I’m sure you do. Do you have a preference for powders?
Su-Nui Escobar: If you open my pantry, I’m going to have both plant-based and animal foods.
Su-Nui Escobar: Personally, no, and then I just see what my patients prefer. The one thing that I ask is for them to look at the added sugar, and then the ingredients, the sources of these protein powers, because some of them are lower quality and some of them are higher quality. I would look more into the quality and the ingredients.
Tara Schmidt: I feel like there’s also a million different kinds of eggs now. They’re all different colors. Some of them are fortified. Do you have a preference with cage free, Omega-3 fortified, brown, white, speckled? If we can afford eggs, what are your thoughts?
Su-Nui Escobar: That’s where my head went with the egg prices nowadays! I do tend to prefer organic foods. Because that’s who I am. But then again, we’re going to have to see the big picture. We are in a time where food is becoming really expensive, so I’d rather have you at peace with your finances than making you eat that organic egg, or that omega fortified egg, if that’s within your price range.
Tara Schmidt: Sometimes plant products will include on the label, how much, less energy, water, or land it took to create this versus an animal. It’ll say, “If this was a real burger, it would’ve used 7,000 gallons of water.” If someone is concerned about the sustainability of their food, what tips do you have for how they should source their protein?
Su-Nui Escobar: Maybe look for somebody that is local so the food doesn’t have to travel that long. Then obviously plant-based will favor a little bit. Maybe go to the farmer’s market and find ways to sustain the planet. Also be mindful of how much food you eat so you don’t have a lot of food waste. Utilize the food to completion and that way you can help the environment and at the same time eat healthy.
Tara Schmidt: Being supportive of people in your community. I love that.
Tara Schmidt: Out of the three macronutrients, we’ve definitely gone through a phase where fats had a lot of negative attention. Carbs are always going to have a lot of negative attention. Protein hasn’t really had its negative attention culturally. Do you think it’s time we make more of a fuss about overindulging in protein? Do you think people are doing too much?
Su-Nui Escobar: People were doing too much five, 10 years ago, but now I have patients that will come and say, “Yeah, I found this protein shake that has 40 grams of protein.” I say, “Why do you need a shake with 40 grams of protein?”
You are 5’3, and a woman in your 40’s, you absolutely will not need that much protein in a protein shake. We have to be more mindful of how much protein we really need, because most people, just by being mindful and intentional of protein intake, will get enough without the need of going to extremes.
Tara Schmidt: I always like to bring up the 2020-2025 US Dietary Guidelines, and it shows these really nice graphics where it says, “Okay, we’re getting plenty of protein. We’re even getting more than recommended, but we’re not getting the right kinds. For males, 31 to 50, I think it is, w e’re getting too much red meat for sure. But not enough fish, not enough beans, not enough legumes. We don’t always have to talk about protein, but can we vary your sources? When we vary your sources, we vary your nutrients.
It’s a win-win situation in my book, but everyone just keeps talking about the macronutrient and not the different sources of it. We can all use a few more plants.
Su-Nui Escobar: I mean, the quality of the proteins is key, and as you mentioned, you’re having beans, you’re having folic acid. You have fiber, you have so many other nutrients beyond the protein itself and also it’s the variety of the food. You make a nice meal that includes different foods.
It’s tasty. You don’t get bored. If you have your chicken salad day in and day out, you will hate chicken salad in two weeks.
Tara Schmidt: Well, when we talk about kids too — exposing kids to different foods. The only reason my kids like black bean quesadillas is because that’s all that they were exposed to, and they get to put the salsa and the toppings on it, and they get to choose if they want it all separate and not touching or mixed in a big bowl. But we need to become comfortable with these foods in order to increase our intake of them. Of course.
Tara Schmidt: Su-Nui, I thank you so much for your time today. You are a wealth of information. I certainly think we speak the same language, so I feel so lucky to have gotten to spend time with you.
Su-Nui Escobar: Thank you so much. Yes, absolutely. On the same page.
Tara Schmidt: Protein products like bars and powders are convenient, but they can also be high in sugar. Fortified foods like pasta aren’t really necessary unless you’re vegan, vegetarian, or just dealing with a picky eater. Don’t get us started on eggs — fortified or not. Any egg is fine because we’re all getting more than enough protein.
Your best bet is choosing a variety of vegetables and plant-based products so you can get in some of those other nutrients too. That’s all for this episode, but if you have a follow-up question, leave us a voicemail at 507-538-6272 and we’ll answer it in a future episode. On the next episode of “On Nutrition,” “The Gut Microbiome.”
Dr. Purna Kashyap: Just like how we get hungry, the bacteria get hungry too.
Tara Schmidt: For more “On Nutrition” episodes and resources, check us out online at mayoclinic.org/onnutrition. If you found this show helpful, please subscribe and make sure to rate and review us on Apple Podcasts or your favorite podcast app. It really helps others find our show. Thanks for listening, and until next time, eat well and be well.
Now in its third edition, The Mayo Clinic Diet is a practical, no-nonsense approach to weight loss. 
Discover more Nutrition & Fitness content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Andres J. Acosta, M.D., Ph.D., Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN

      Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN, LD is a registered dietitian and instructor of nutrition at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, MN. She is the lead dietitian for the Mayo Clinic Diet, host of the podcast On Nutrition, Medical Editor of the Nutrition & Fitness channel, and co-authored  The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight Loss Medications Edition. Tara is passionate about reducing weight bias and educating people about realistic, evidence-based weight management. Tara enjoys staying busy with her husband, two children, and golden retriever (who just so happens to like vegetables).
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.