Morphea is a rare skin condition characterized by small red or purple patches that develop firm white or ivory centers. The affected skin becomes tight and less flexible.
Morphea is a rare skin condition characterized by small red or purple patches that develop firm white or ivory centers. The affected skin becomes tight and less flexible.
Morphea (mor-FEE-uh) is a rare condition that causes painless, discolored patches on your skin.
Typically, the skin changes appear on the belly, chest or back. But they might also appear on your face, arms and legs. Over time the patches may become firm, dry and smooth. Morphea tends to affect only the outer layers of your skin. But some forms of the condition also affect deeper tissues and may restrict movement in the joints.
Morphea usually improves on its own over time, though recurrences are common. In the meantime, medications and therapies are available to help treat the skin discoloration and other effects.
Signs and symptoms of morphea vary depending on the type and stage of the condition. They include:
Morphea affects the skin and underlying tissue and sometimes bone. The condition generally lasts several years and then improves or at times disappears by itself. It may leave scars or areas of darkened or discolored skin. It is possible for morphea to recur.
See your doctor if you notice reddish patches of hardening or thickening skin. Early diagnosis and treatment may help slow the development of new patches and allow your doctor to identify and treat complications before they worsen.
The cause of morphea is unknown. It may be caused by an unusual reaction of your immune system. In people at increased risk of morphea, it could be triggered by injury to the affected area, medications, chemical toxins, an infection or radiation therapy.
Certain factors may affect your risk of developing morphea, including:
Morphea can cause a number of complications, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.