Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy can cause worry. But it isn't always a sign of trouble. Bleeding in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, also called the first trimester, is common. And most people who have bleeding during pregnancy go on to deliver healthy babies.
Still, take vaginal bleeding during pregnancy seriously. Sometimes bleeding during pregnancy could be a symptom of a miscarriage. Or sometimes bleeding might be a symptom of a condition that needs treatment right away.
Learn about the most common causes of vaginal bleeding during pregnancy. Then you'll know what to look for. And you'll know when to contact your healthcare professional.
Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy has many causes. Some causes are serious. But many aren't.
Tell your healthcare professional about any vaginal bleeding during pregnancy. Be ready to say how much blood you passed, what it looked like and whether it had clots or tissue in it.
During the first trimester, weeks one through 12:
During the second trimester, weeks 13 through 27:
During the third trimester, weeks 28 through 40:
In the final weeks of pregnancy, vaginal discharge that is pink or bloody might be a sign of labor starting. That's called the bloody show. If you see pink or bloody discharge near the end of pregnancy, contact your healthcare professional to make sure what you're having is bloody show. Sometimes, it might be a sign of a pregnancy complication.
Original article: https://www.mayoclinic.org/symptoms/bleeding-during-pregnancy/basics/when-to-see-doctor/sym-20050636
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.

Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Manage Cookies

Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.