Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Insulin and weight gain often go hand in hand, but weight control is possible. If you need insulin therapy, here's how to minimize — or avoid — weight gain.
People who take insulin often gain weight. Insulin is a hormone that regulates how the body absorbs sugar, also known as glucose. The weight gain can be frustrating because keeping a healthy weight is important to manage your diabetes. The good news is that you can maintain your weight while taking insulin.
When you take insulin, sugar can enter your cells. This makes the sugar levels in your blood go down. This is the goal of treatment.
But if you take in more calories than you need to keep a healthy weight, your cells will get more sugar than they need. This happens in people who don't have diabetes, too. How many calories you need depends on how active you are. Sugar that your cells don't need to use becomes fat.
Eating healthy foods and being physically active most days of the week can help you not gain weight. The following tips can help you keep the pounds off:
Count calories. Eating and drinking fewer calories helps you prevent weight gain. Keep fruits, vegetables and whole grains in your refrigerator and pantry. Plan for every meal to have the right mix of starches, fruits and vegetables, proteins, and fats. Generally, recommended meals would consist of half nonstarchy vegetable, one-quarter protein and one-quarter a starch, such as rice, or a starchy vegetable, such as corn or peas.
Shrink the sizes of your portions, don't take second helpings and drink water instead of high-calorie drinks. Talk to your health care provider, nurse or a dietitian about how to plan meals and where to find resources.
Be physically active. Physical activity burns calories. A recommended goal for most adults is at least 150 minutes a week (or 30 minutes five days a week) of moderately intense aerobic activity plus muscle-strengthening exercises at least two times a week. Aerobic activities can include walking, bicycling, water aerobics, dancing or gardening. Talk with your provider about activities and exercises that are right for you.
Also, ask your provider how to handle exercise. Physical activity helps your body use insulin more efficiently. Depending on how much exercise you're planning on doing, you may need to cut back on your insulin dosage or have a snack. It's possible for your blood sugar to drop even hours after exercise.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.