Video 1: All about thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS): Diagnosis
What are the types of thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Sam Farres, M.D., Chair, Division of Vascular Surgery Mayo Clinic in Florida: Very broadly speaking, it can be divided into neurogenic thoracic outlet, if the nerves are compressed or irritated. The other type is vascular thoracic outlet, if the artery or the veins are compressed. And I would like to add a third type where both nerve and vessels are compressed, and that can be called non-specific TOS.
Can I get thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) on both sides?
 Dr. Farres: Yes, that can happen. It's less common, but it can happen on right side, left side, dominant arm or the non-dominant one. Or some kind of combination. So that potentially can occur.
How is thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) diagnosed?
Dr. Farres: It's important to have a correct diagnosis for a thoracic outlet as this will determine what type of therapy and treatment is implemented.  It's typically an exclusion of diagnosis, and this process starts with physical examination and good history, followed by imaging studies, vascular studies, provocative tests, and consultation with a multidisciplinary team in order to exclude what's usually more common.
Who treats thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Dr. Farres: So thoracic outlet syndrome can be assessed and managed by multiple health professionals. At Mayo Clinic, Florida,  we have a multidisciplinary team that typically assesses, diagnoses, and then manages thoracic outlet. So, in addition to vascular surgery as a team, we also have a peripheral neurologist who would assess the patient. Physical medicine and rehabilitation, peripheral neurologist, brachial plexus specialist, pain medicine, intervention radiology and regional anesthesia will help in the assessment and diagnosis of thoracic outlet and then the treatment.
Video 2: All about thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS): Treatment
Can I treat thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) with physical therapy and sports medicine?
Sam Farres, M.D., Chair, Division of Vascular Surgery Mayo Clinic in Florida: Absolutely. In fact, physical therapy and sports medicine can be used effectively in treating particularly neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. Usually it focuses on improving posture and posture correction, in addition to strengthening and stretching exercises. Sports medicine can effectively offer guidance toward activity modification and pain management. And a tailored program and exercise for an individual patient can help in improving symptoms and avoiding invasive treatment.
What are the treatment options for thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Dr. Farres: Treatment options for TOS varies based on the underlying cause and the type of the TOS – neurogenic, vascular or non-specific. It's crucial to customize the treatment based on the underlying cause and to have it tailored through a multidisciplinary approach. Having said that, the most common treatment options are medications such as muscle relaxant, lifestyle modification, ergonomic movement, posture corrections. And more invasive would be injections and surgery as the form of the most invasive type of treatment.
What are the pros and cons of getting an injection for thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Dr. Farres: The treatment for TOS varies based on the type of TOS, the severity of symptoms, and the underlying cause. But, broadly speaking, the pros for injections would be the fact that they are less invasive, they associate with less risk compared with surgery. They provide temporary relief of symptoms and sometimes can be used  as diagnostic tools to know if the condition we are dealing with is thoracic outlet syndrome. On the other hand, the injection treatment will not last for a long time, since it's temporary in relieving the symptoms, and will not remove the underlying cause and has limited durability.
What are the pros and cons of getting surgery for thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Dr. Farres: Surgery can provide definitive treatment, long term result and can be tailored to the specific underlying cause in addressing the structural abnormalities. On the other hand, surgery is more invasive, has longer recovery time and associate potentially with surgical related complications.
What is the best surgical approach for thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?
Dr. Farres: The best surgical approach depends on the type of the TOS we're dealing with in addition to the underlying cause in patient symptoms and presentation. In fact, it can be tailored according to that and based on the multidisciplinary team recommendations.
Diagnosing thoracic outlet syndrome can be challenging. Symptoms can vary greatly among people. Your healthcare professional may review your symptoms and medical history and conduct a physical exam. You also may need imaging and other types of tests.
Physical exam. Your healthcare professional does a physical exam to look for signs of thoracic outlet syndrome. These may include a depression in your shoulder or a bony area above the collarbone. Your healthcare professional also may look for swelling or a change in color in your arm. You may need to have your pulse and your range of motion checked.
Your health professional may reproduce your symptoms by asking you to move or lift your arms or turn your head. Knowing which positions and movements trigger your symptoms can help identify thoracic outlet syndrome.
To confirm the diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome, you may need one or more of the following tests:
Arteriography and venography. In these tests, a thin, flexible tube called a catheter is inserted through a small cut, often in your groin. During arteriography, the catheter moves through your major arteries. During venography, the catheter moves through your veins. The catheter is threaded to the affected blood vessels. Then a dye is injected to show X-ray images of your arteries or veins.
Healthcare professionals can check to see if you have a compressed vein or artery. If a vein or artery has a clot, doctors can deliver medications through the catheter to dissolve the clot.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your thoracic outlet syndrome-related health concerns
					Start Here


A conservative approach to treatment may be effective for most people, especially if your condition is diagnosed early. Treatment may include:
Your healthcare professional may recommend surgery if conservative treatments haven't been effective. Or you might consider surgery if you experience ongoing or worsening symptoms.
A surgeon trained in chest surgery, known as a thoracic surgeon, or blood vessel surgery, known as a vascular surgeon, typically does the procedure.
Thoracic outlet syndrome surgery has risks of complications, such as injury to the nerves, known as the brachial plexus. Also, surgery may not relieve your symptoms or only partially relieve your symptoms, and symptoms may come back.
Surgery to treat thoracic outlet syndrome, called thoracic outlet decompression, may be done using several different approaches. These approaches involve removing a muscle and a part of the first rib to relieve compression. You also may need surgery to repair damaged blood vessels.
In venous or arterial thoracic outlet syndrome, your surgeon may deliver medicines to dissolve blood clots prior to thoracic outlet decompression. Or you may need a procedure to remove a clot from the vein or artery or to repair the vein or artery. The procedure is done before thoracic outlet decompression.
If you have arterial thoracic outlet syndrome, your surgeon may need to replace the damaged artery. This is done with a section of an artery from another part of your body, known as a graft. Or an artificial graft may be used. This procedure may be done at the same time as a procedure to have the first rib removed.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you're diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome, a physical therapist may instruct you to do exercises at home. The exercises can strengthen and support the muscles surrounding your thoracic outlet.
In general, to avoid unnecessary stress on your shoulders and muscles surrounding the thoracic outlet:
Symptoms associated with thoracic outlet syndrome can be caused by a number of other conditions. This can make it hard to diagnose. Many people experience thoracic outlet syndrome symptoms for years before they are diagnosed with the condition. Discuss your concerns with your healthcare professional if your symptoms persist and a diagnosis hasn't been made.
You're likely to start by seeing your healthcare professional. Or you may be referred to a doctor trained in blood vessel conditions or in blood vessel surgery, known as a vascular surgeon.
Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment.
Preparing a list of questions helps you make the most of your time. For thoracic outlet syndrome, some basic questions to ask include:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions you have.
It's likely you'll be asked several questions, such as:
While you're waiting for your appointment, try taking a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others). Your discomfort also may be improved if you maintain good posture and avoid using repetitive movements and lifting heavy objects.

Thoracic outlet syndrome care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.