Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Healthy Brain / Empathy on empty?  Find the right fuel to refill your tank
Sharp: 14 Simple Ways to Improve Your Life with Brain Science
“Sharp: 14 Simple Ways to Improve Your Life with Brain Science,” by Therese Huston, Ph.D., is the ultimate guide to learning about your brain. With the knowledge of the up-to-date research in this book, you can discover more than 50 ways to sharpen focus, spark motivation, improve decision-making, boost memory, manage stress and nurture your relationships. The following excerpt provides great examples of nurturing relationships through empathy, which doesn’t come naturally for everyone. Even if you don’t think of yourself as an empathetic person, you can learn to become one! Read about the different kinds of empathy, how to find it and research on how empathy ages in the excerpt below. Then learn about this topic more in-depth by reading “Sharp: 14 Simple Ways to Improve Your Life with Brain Science.”
You start off the day in a good mood. But once you look at your schedule, your whole body slumps. You think to yourself, “Seriously? It’s going to be one person after another whining about their problems.” You resign yourself to putting on your understanding face and getting through it, but you know today is going to take a toll.
We’ve all been there, but what if, instead, you looked at your calendar and thought, “Interesting—I’ve got an opportunity to take care of so many people. What an incredible day this is going to be!”
The paragraph above might seem like foolishly optimistic thinking (or perhaps it sounds so saccharine that you threw up a little in your mouth just reading it). I hear you. Before I started researching this book, I would have thought such an attitude was either unrealistic or required some level of Dalai Lama-like empathy I could never muster.
I’m here to tell you that it is realistic and it doesn’t require the empathy of a global spiritual leader. But empathy is a good place to start. Empathy has become such an HR-buzzword that companies are spending millions of dollars training leaders how to show more of it. Surprisingly, neuroscientists have some answers that many well-intentioned trainers miss.
You might be wondering what, exactly, empathy is. You’re not alone. As of 2016, psychologists had 43 (!) different definitions for empathy, and more have been added since then. Confusion abounds.
What most experts agree upon today is that there are at least two kinds of empathy, and both are about understanding another person’s emotions. One kind is emotional or affective empathy, which is when you feel someone else’s joy or pain and share their emotional experience. The other kind is cognitive empathy, commonly referred to as perspective taking, which is when you perceive that someone else is feeling joy or pain and you’re able to infer how that might affect them.
To clarify the difference between these two kinds of empathy, imagine that a colleague didn’t get a promotion she expected. If you’re experiencing emotional empathy, you feel her sense of shock, distrust, and intense disappointment, maybe rising anger, as she starts telling you about it. You might feel ill as she describes it or cry along with her. Or, if you’re feeling cognitive empathy, you perceive that she’s in pain and deeply disappointed but don’t feel any of those emotions yourself. You might be thinking about what those emotions mean for her, and perhaps predict that she won’t be able to focus this afternoon. Or you might run through both kinds of empathy, first feeling along with her, then moving into thinking and predicting mode. Put simply, emotional empathy is feeling, cognitive empathy is thinking.
There is no wrong or right way to be, but you’ll face different challenges depending on how much emotional and cognitive empathy you experience.
How do you increase your empathy levels? Motivation is key. Researchers have found that if you’re highly motivated to empathize, you can. When you’re motivated, you’ll find yourself orienting your attention to different cues by paying more attention to someone’s emotional nail-biting, hunched shoulders, or wiggling foot, and voila, you’re right there with them. In fact, researchers find that when most people aren’t feeling empathy, it’s not because they’re unable to feel empathy, it’s typically because they’re not sufficiently motivated to empathize (or more accurately, they’re feeling conflicting motives).
You could tap into several possible motives to ramp up your empathy. One might be a desire to connect and belong. Or you could be driven to empathize with someone who is struggling because you want to feel closer to them or because you want to be part of a team that cares. You might also be driven to empathize because you see it as a personally desirable quality and it makes you feel good about yourself. If you decided that “being more caring and kinder” is one of your priorities for the year, you’ll be galvanized to empathize more. Lastly, you’ll be more motivated to empathize with people who are like you. If you focus on your similarities to someone else (and less on your differences), you’ll find it easier to understand or even feel their feelings.
If one of these motives resonates with you, take a few minutes to think about it before going into a meeting in which you want to empathize. Is your goal to connect and belong, to become a better person, or to see what you have in common? All are worthwhile motives that will help you lean in to empathy.
If you’re in your sixties, you may find yourself thinking, more and more often, “That behavior seems crazy to me.” Maybe it’s all the piercings of the twenty-two-year-old who serves you coffee, or maybe it’s the yard full of old appliances that you see when you drive through your neighborhood. You once thought of yourself as accepting people from all walks of life, but now you find yourself increasingly puzzled (and sometimes annoyed) by what feels like other people’s bizarre choices.
Aging will do that to you. Cognitive empathy, the ability to take someone else’s perspective, typically changes over the course of our lives. It increases from our teenage years until our late thirties or early forties, peaks, and then begins to drop. That can make it harder than ever to understand why a colleague who is twenty years younger does what they do, but it’s not just the age difference that poses a challenge. You might be equally baffled by a friend’s ridiculous romantic choices—they’re moving in with someone after dating for only three months?—even though you and your friend are the same age. Perspective-taking probably isn’t as easy as it once was.
Two things can help. Education is one. The more educated a person is, the easier it is for them to do perspective-taking as they age. But since you might not be interested in going back to college at age sixty, thankfully, you have another option: work on your motivations. Older adults who are highly motivated to have cognitive empathy are able to do perspective-taking as skillfully as their much younger peers.
So if you find yourself thinking, “I really need to have more empathy,” figure out which of those motives described earlier resonates most with you. Or create your motive. Maybe you want your legacy to be that you cared about other people. Maybe you want the pleasure of having more friends.
How about emotional empathy? Research reveals that emotional empathy remains steady or, in many cases, increases with age. Your ability to feel what other people are feeling is just as high, maybe higher, than it ever was, especially when you’ve just interacted with a person or watched them go through something difficult.
If you’re struggling to tap into your empathy at work, invite the person whose actions baffle you out for coffee. It might be hard to understand their reasoning based on what they did in a team meeting, but if you get to know them better, you can tap into your emotional empathy. You could try saying, “I’m curious about your perspective on the X project. I’m hoping to learn from you. Would you mind sharing your thoughts?”
An excerpt from “Sharp: 14 Simple Ways to Improve Your Life with Brain Science,” by Therese Huston, Ph.D.
The Guide to the Comatose Patient is written with clear purpose in mind, offering information and advice to families working through the unpredictability of acute brain injuries resulting in coma. Eelco F.M. Wijdicks, M.D., is a neurointensivist at Mayo Clinic and professor of neurology with an expertise in acute brain…
Discover more Healthy Brain content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.
by Eelco F.M. Wijdicks, M.D., Ph.D., FACP, FNCS

      Dr. Huston is a cognitive scientist at Seattle University, where she transforms good science into great strategies. She was the founding director of the Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning at Seattle University and is now a consultant for their Center for Faculty Development. She is the author of Let’s Talk: Make Effective Feedback Your Superpower; How Women Decide; and Teaching What You Don’t Know and has written for the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times, TIME, The Guardian, and Harvard Business Review. Therese has led workshops and delivered presentations to Fortune 500 companies, start-ups, and universities across the globe. She lives in Seattle with her husband and their dog, who insists on being the real boss of the household.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Eelco F.M. Wijdicks, M.D., Ph.D., FACP, FNCS
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.