Allergies happen when the immune system reacts to a foreign substance that gets inside the body. These substances are known as allergens. They include pollen, bee venom and pet dander. Allergies also can happen due to certain foods and medicines that don't cause reactions in most people.
The immune system makes protective proteins called antibodies that attack invaders such as germs. But with allergies, the immune system makes antibodies that mark a specific allergen as harmful, even though it isn't. Coming into contact with the allergen causes an immune system reaction that can inflame the skin, sinuses, airways or digestive system.
Allergic reactions vary from person to person. They can range from minor irritation to a life-threatening emergency called anaphylaxis. While most allergies can't be cured, treatments can help relieve your allergy symptoms.
Allergy symptoms depend on what allergen is involved. The symptoms can affect the airways, sinuses and nasal passages, skin, and digestive system. Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe. Sometimes, allergies can trigger a life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis.
Hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis, can cause:
Atopic dermatitis, an allergic skin condition also called eczema, can cause skin to:
Some types of allergies can trigger a severe reaction known as anaphylaxis. Certain foods, insect stings and medicines are among the allergens that can set off this life-threatening emergency. Anaphylaxis can cause you to go into shock. Other symptoms include:
You might see a healthcare professional if you have symptoms that you think are caused by an allergy, and over-the-counter allergy medicines sold without a prescription didn't give you enough relief. If you have symptoms after starting a new medicine for a health condition, call the healthcare professional who prescribed it right away.
For a severe allergic reaction, also called anaphylaxis, call 911 or your local emergency number. Or get emergency medical help. A shot of prescription medicine called epinephrine is needed to treat anaphylaxis. If you carry an epinephrine auto-injector (Auvi-Q, EpiPen, others), give yourself a shot right away.
Even if your symptoms get better after an epinephrine shot, go to the emergency room. Healthcare professionals need to make sure your symptoms don't come back when the effects of the shot wear off.
If you've had a severe allergy attack or any symptoms of anaphylaxis in the past, make an appointment to see your healthcare professional. Allergy testing and the creation of a long-term treatment plan to manage anaphylaxis can be a challenge. So you'll likely need to see a doctor called an allergist who finds and treats allergies and other immune system conditions.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Various substances can cause allergies. An allergy starts when the immune system mistakes a substance that's usually harmless for a dangerous invader. The immune system then makes antibodies that stay on the alert for that specific allergen. When you're exposed to the allergen again, these antibodies can release some immune system chemicals that cause allergy symptoms.
Having an allergy raises the risk of certain other health conditions called complications, including:
Preventing allergic reactions depends on the type of allergy you have. General measures include the following:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Asthma & Allergy support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.