Temporal lobe seizures begin in the temporal lobes of the brain. These areas process emotions and are important for short-term memory. Symptoms of a temporal lobe seizure often affect these functions . Some people have odd feelings during the seizure, such as joy, deja vu or fear.
Temporal lobe seizures are sometimes called focal seizures with impaired awareness. Some people are aware of what's going on during the seizure. People who have more-intense seizures might look awake but won't respond to what's around them. Their lips and hands may make motions over and over.
The cause of temporal lobe seizures often isn't known. But it may stem from a scar in the temporal lobe. Temporal lobe seizures are treated with medicine. Some people who don't respond to medicine may have surgery.
An odd feeling called an aura may happen before a temporal lobe seizure. An aura acts as a warning. Not everyone who has temporal lobe seizures has auras. And not everyone who has auras remembers them.
The aura is the first part of a focal seizure before a loss of consciousness.
Sometimes temporal lobe seizures keep people from responding to others. This type of temporal lobe seizure most often lasts 30 seconds to 2 minutes.
Symptoms of a temporal lobe seizure include:
Sometimes, what starts as a temporal lobe seizure becomes a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. This type of seizure causes shaking, known as convulsions, and loss of consciousness. It also is called a grand mal seizure.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if:
For a first seizure, see a healthcare professional.

                    There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                    Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                

                    Sign up for free and receive the latest on epilepsy treatment, care
                    and management.
                


ErrorEmail field is required
                

ErrorInclude a valid email
                    address
                
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                    You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                    requested in your inbox.
                
Each side of the brain has four lobes. The frontal lobe is important for thinking and for managing voluntary movement or activity. The parietal lobe is involved in body temperature, taste, touch and movement. The occipital lobe is linked to vision. The temporal lobe processes memories, putting them with taste, sound, sight and touch.
Each side of the brain has four lobes. The frontal lobe is important for thinking and for managing voluntary movement or activity. The parietal lobe is involved in body temperature, taste, touch and movement. The occipital lobe is linked to vision. The temporal lobe processes memories, putting them with taste, sound, sight and touch.
Often, experts don't know the cause of temporal lobe seizures. But they can be a result of the following factors:
During waking and sleeping, the brain cells have electrical activity. A burst of electrical activity in many brain cells may cause a seizure.
If this burst happens in just one area of the brain, the result is a focal seizure. A temporal lobe seizure is a focal seizure that starts in one of the temporal lobes.
There are several risk factors for temporal lobe seizure. They pose the most risk if they happen early in life. These risk factors include:
Over time, repeated temporal lobe seizures can cause the part of the brain involved in learning and memory to shrink. This area of the brain is called the hippocampus. The loss of brain cells in the hippocampus may cause memory problems.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Epilepsy & Seizures support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.