Here are some frequently asked questions about paying online. You can pay online through the Mayo Clinic Patient Portal, directly from the web, or with the Mayo Clinic App.
Your Mayo Clinic number and a valid email address are required to create an account.
Go to the Mayo Clinic Patient Portal and open your portal account. Navigate to the view bill option. Once you click on View/Pay Bill your account information is displayed which includes open visits with balances, total balance owing, itemized and monthly statements. You also have the ability to make a payment or set up a payment plan.
Once you have created your Mayo Clinic Patient Portal account, you can view your information on a computer, tablet, or mobile device. You'll need to create your portal account to view your bill through the Mayo Clinic App.
Go to the Mayo Clinic Patient Portal and open your portal account. Navigate to the view bill option..
Itemized statements are presented in either a tiled or list view. Depending on which view you choose, you'll either click on the tile or the appropriate visit date in the list. Itemized statements can be printed or downloaded and saved.
Your itemized statement may not be available for online viewing if your charges have not yet finalized or if your account receives special handling by one of our account representatives.
If you visit more than one facility on the same date, charges will be billed by each facility that provided services. When you visit a clinic setting, the itemized statement contains physician services and tests. When you visit a hospital as either an inpatient or outpatient, you will receive two bills — one for the professional component (physician services, tests) and one for the technical component (laboratory services, facility fees, general nursing care).
If you have multiple itemized statements for the same date(s) of service, review the itemized statement summary screen. Verify that the account numbers (Mayo Clinic number plus the visit number) are different for each itemized statement. In addition, check whether the service provider (facility name) is different for each itemized statement you are questioning.
You can view up to 24 months of itemized statement history.
Payments received are reflected on the monthly statement. The monthly statement is available to the billing addressee. The billing addressee is the person designated to receive the monthly statement and coordinate billing, payment, and insurance coverage for the account.
Out of respect for your privacy, if you are 18 years of age or older your itemized statements are viewable only by you.
As a billing addressee, you have access to your own itemized statements and itemized statements for persons under the age of 18 for whom you have been designated as the billing addressee.
Please contact Patient Account Services through the secure Mayo Clinic Patient Portal Message Center. You may also contact Patient Account Services by telephone at 844-217-9591 (toll-free).
Go to the Mayo Clinic Patient Portal and open your portal account. Navigate to the monthly statement option. Monthly statements can be printed and downloaded and saved.
Your monthly statement may not be available for online viewing if your account does not have a balance due; if your account receives special handling by one of our account representatives; or if you are not a billing addressee (a billing addressee is the person designated to receive the monthly billing and who coordinates the billing, payment, and insurance coverage for the account).
Services qualify for billing throughout the month. The total charges for your services will appear on the next monthly statement after the bill has been finalized.
No. To stop receiving paper statements, you need to have a Mayo Clinic Patient Portal account.
Log in to your Mayo Clinic Patient Portal account. Select 'Account Settings' and click on Billing Preference to change your preferences..
Log in to your Mayo Clinic Patient Portal account using the web or through the Mayo Clinic App. Follow the online instructions for paying your bill. Navigate to the View Bill option. Once you click on View/Pay Bill your account information is displayed which includes open visits with balances, total balance owing, itemized and monthly statements. You also have the ability to make a payment or set up a payment plan.

You can pay online without creating or accessing your Mayo Clinic Patient Portal account. Go to the Mayo Clinic Patient Portal. Using the option 'Pay your bill online' enter your Mayo Clinic number, date of birth and your payment amount along with your credit card information.

You can pay by mail. Send your payment with your Guarantor ID written on your check to:
Mayo Clinic
PO Box 790339
St. Louis, MO 63179-0339
Please contact Patient Account Services through the secure Mayo Clinic Patient Portal Message Center. You may also contact us by phone.
Call Patient Account Services at 844-217-9591 (toll-free), Monday through Friday.
All Mayo locations
Monday through Thursday
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Central time (during daylight saving time)
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Central time (during standard time)
Friday
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (year round)
Profile information updates can take up to 24 hours.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.