Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Several types of medicines are used to treat allergy symptoms. Here's what you should know.
Allergy medicines are available as pills, liquids, inhalers, nasal sprays, eye drops, skin creams and shots, also called injections. Many allergy medicines are available without a prescription. Here are the different types of medicine options available to treat allergies. Talk with a healthcare professional to find the one that's best for you.
Antihistamines block certain cells in the body from receiving histamine. Histamine is a chemical released by the immune system that causes the symptoms of an allergic reaction.
Antihistamine nasal sprays help relieve sneezing, an itchy or runny nose, sinus congestion, and postnasal drip.
Side effects of antihistamine nasal sprays might include a bitter taste and feeling very sleepy.
Examples of antihistamine nasal sprays include:
Antihistamine eye drops relieve itchy, red, swollen eyes. These eye drops may have a combination of antihistamines and other medicines. Some antihistamine eye drops require a prescription.
Side effects might include headache and dry eyes. If antihistamine eye drops sting or burn, try keeping them in the refrigerator. Or use refrigerated artificial tear drops before adding antihistamine eye drops.
Examples of antihistamine eye drops include:
Oral antihistamines ease many symptoms of allergies. These include a runny nose, itchy or watery eyes, hives, and swelling. Some of these medicines are available without a prescription.
Side effects include drowsiness, so use with caution if you need to drive or be alert.
Antihistamines that tend to cause drowsiness include:
Antihistamines much less likely to cause drowsiness include:
Please note that cetirizine and loratadine are still known to cause drowsiness in about 10% of people who take them.
Corticosteroids suppress inflammation caused by allergies. This relieves symptoms.
Corticosteroid sprays, also called glucocorticoid sprays, prevent and relieve nasal allergy symptoms. These medicines are very effective on their own for treating ongoing or seasonal hay fever.
Side effects can include an unpleasant taste, nasal irritation and nosebleeds.
Aerosol formulas provide the benefits without the unpleasant taste or the feeling of liquid running down the throat.
Corticosteroid eye drops provide special relief for itchy, red or watery eyes when other treatments don't work. An eye doctor, also called an ophthalmologist, usually monitors the use of these eye drops because of risks.
Risks include cataracts, glaucoma and infection.
Examples of corticosteroid eye drops include:
Oral corticosteroids are used to treat severe symptoms caused by all types of allergic reactions. These medicines can worsen high blood pressure and cause other long-term risks.
Long-term risks include cataracts, osteoporosis, muscle weakness, stomach ulcers, high blood sugar and delayed growth in children.
Prescription oral corticosteroids include:
Inhaled corticosteroids are often used in the daily treatment of asthma. Asthma is caused or worsened by reactions to airborne allergy triggers, also called allergens. Some inhalers combine corticosteroids with other medicines that open the airways called bronchodilators.
Side effects are often minor. Inhalers can irritate the mouth and throat and cause oral yeast infections, also called thrush.
Corticosteroid creams relieve allergic skin reactions such as itching, scaling, or a change in skin color. Although some mild treatments are available without a prescription, talk to your care team before using these creams for more than a few weeks.
Side effects can include irritation and a change in skin color. Long-term use can cause thinning of the skin and changes to hormone levels, especially with stronger prescription corticosteroids.
Mast cell stabilizers block the release of chemicals in the immune system that lead to allergic reactions. These medicines are often safe but need to be used for several days to produce the full effect. Mast cell stabilizers are used when antihistamines are not working or well tolerated.
Immunotherapy is meant to train the body's immune system not to react to certain allergens. This treatment might protect broadly against allergens that are hard to avoid such as pollens, dust mites and molds. Biologic medicines make changes to the body's immune system to treat allergic conditions such as asthma, sinusitis, hives and food allergy.
Immunotherapy is carefully timed and monitored while exposure to allergens is slowly increased. Immunotherapy might be useful in several cases, especially when other treatments aren't effective or tolerated.
Immunotherapy may be given as a series of shots, also called injections, usually one or two times a week. The dose may be increased during this time based on a person's tolerance. The highest tolerated dose can then be given year-round every 2 to 4 weeks.
Side effects might include irritation at the injection site and allergy symptoms such as, sneezing, congestion, hives, and itchy or watery eyes. Rarely, allergy shots can cause anaphylaxis.
Biological medicines given by injection include:
When treating a peanut allergy in children, a pill might help. Although peanuts may still need to be avoided, this medicine might help prevent a severe reaction if peanuts are eaten by accident. It cannot be used as emergency treatment for anaphylaxis.
Side effects include swelling of the throat and anaphylaxis in rare cases. If you have asthma, this treatment may make your symptoms worse.
When treating for dust mites or hay fever, a medicine tablet may be placed under the tongue. This is called sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT). The medicine dissolves and is absorbed under the tongue. This method is known to relieve asthma and allergy symptoms.
Decongestants are used for quick, temporary relief of nasal and sinus congestion. They're not intended for routine or long-term treatment of allergy symptoms. They also are not recommended for people with high blood pressure, heart disease, glaucoma or overactive thyroid, also called hyperthyroidism.
Side effects include trouble sleeping, headache, increased blood pressure and irritability.
Nasal decongestant sprays and drops relieve nasal and sinus congestion. But they only should be used for a short time. Use of these sprays and drops for more than three days in a row can cause more congestion when treatment stops. This is called rebound congestion.
Oral decongestants also relieve nasal and sinus congestion. Many decongestants are available without a prescription.
Some oral allergy medicines contain a decongestant and an antihistamine. Examples include:
A leukotriene inhibitor blocks chemicals that cause allergy symptoms. These chemicals are called leukotrienes. This oral medicine relieves asthma and hay fever and is available by prescription only.
Side effects of leukotriene inhibitors include anxiety, depression, strange dreams, trouble sleeping, and suicidal thinking or behavior.
Epinephrine shots are used to treat a sudden, life-threatening allergic reaction, also called anaphylaxis. Symptoms of anaphylaxis include swelling in the throat and difficulty breathing.
Shots to treat anaphylaxis are given with an autoinjector. This device has a self-injecting syringe and needle. You might need to carry two autoinjectors if there's a chance you have a severe allergy. Severe allergic reactions might be triggered by food, such as peanuts, or insect venom, such as bees and wasps.
A healthcare professional will train you on how to use an epinephrine autoinjector. Get the type that your health professional prescribes, as each brand may work differently. Also, be sure to replace your emergency epinephrine before the expiration date.
Sometimes, a second injection is needed. If anaphylaxis happens, call 911 or get emergency medical care.
Examples of these emergency allergy medicines include:
Work with your care team to choose the safest and most effective allergy medicine for you. Even nonprescription medicines have side effects. Some allergy medicines can cause problems when combined with other treatments and conditions.
It's even more important to speak to your care team about allergy medicines if:
Keep track of your symptoms. Note when you use your medicines and how much you take. This information can help your care team figure out what works best. You might need to try a few different options to find the most effective medicine with the fewest side effects.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.