Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Burns are tissue damage from a variety of sources. Examples are hot liquids, the sun, flames, chemicals, electricity and steam. Kitchen-related injuries from hot drinks, soups and microwaved foods are common among children.
Major burns need emergency medical help. Minor burns can usually be treated with first aid.
Call 911 or seek immediate care for major burns, which:
Electrical burns, including those caused by lightning, and major chemical burns need emergency medical care. A minor burn might need emergency care if it affects the eyes, mouth, hands or genitals. Babies and older adults might need emergency care for minor burns as well.
For major burns, apply first aid until emergency help arrives:
For minor burns, follow these first-aid guidelines:
If you haven't had a tetanus shot in the past five years and the burn is deep, you may need a booster shot. Try to get this within 48 hours of the injury.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.