Chemotherapy for breast cancer uses drugs to target and destroy breast cancer cells. These drugs are usually injected directly into a vein through a needle or taken by mouth as pills.
Chemotherapy for breast cancer frequently is used in addition to other treatments, such as surgery, radiation or hormone therapy. Chemotherapy can be used to increase the chance of a cure, decrease the risk of the cancer returning, alleviate symptoms from the cancer or help people with cancer live longer with a better quality of life.
If the cancer has recurred or spread, chemotherapy may control the breast cancer to help you live longer. Or it can help ease symptoms the cancer is causing.
Chemotherapy for breast cancer also carries a risk of side effects — some temporary and mild, others more serious or permanent. Your doctor can help you decide whether chemotherapy for breast cancer is a good choice for you.
Chemotherapy for breast cancer may be given in the following situations:
After you have surgery to remove the breast cancer, your doctor may recommend chemotherapy to destroy any undetected cancer cells and reduce your risk of the cancer recurring. This is known as adjuvant chemotherapy.
Your doctor may recommend adjuvant chemotherapy if you have a high risk of the cancer recurring or spreading to other parts of your body (metastasizing), even if there is no evidence of cancer after surgery. You may have a higher risk of metastasis if cancer cells are found in lymph nodes near the affected breast.
Chemotherapy is sometimes given before surgery (known as neoadjuvant therapy or preoperative chemotherapy) to shrink larger cancers. This may:
If breast cancer has spread to other parts of your body and surgery isn't an option, chemotherapy can be used as the primary treatment. It may be used in combination with targeted therapy.
The main goal of chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer is generally to improve quality and length of life rather than to cure the disease.

                            There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                            Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                        

                        Sign up for free and receive the latest on breast cancer treatment, care
                        and management.
                    


ErrorEmail field is required
                        


ErrorInclude a valid email
                            address
                        
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                            You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                            requested in your inbox.
                        
Chemotherapy medications travel throughout the body. Side effects depend on the drugs you receive and your reaction to them. Side effects may get worse during the course of treatment. Most side effects are temporary and subside once treatment is finished. Sometimes chemotherapy can have long-term or permanent effects.
In the process of targeting fast-growing cancer cells, chemotherapy drugs can also damage other fast-growing healthy cells, such as those in the hair follicles, bone marrow and digestive tract. These side effects often go away after treatment is finished or within a year after completing chemotherapy. In some cases, they may be long lasting.
Certain chemotherapy drugs for breast cancer can cause long-term side effects, including:
Infertility. One possible side effect that may not go away is infertility. Some anti-cancer drugs damage the ovaries. This may cause menopause symptoms, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness. Menstrual periods may become irregular or stop (amenorrhea). If ovulation ceases, pregnancy becomes impossible.
Depending on your age, chemotherapy may induce a premature permanent menopause. Discuss with your doctor your risk of permanent menopause and its consequences.
If you continue to menstruate, you may still be able to get pregnant, even during treatment or after treatment is completed. But because the effects of chemotherapy are dangerous to the fetus, talk with your doctor about appropriate birth control options before treatment begins.
Feelings of fear, sadness and isolation can compound the physical side effects of chemotherapy, both during and after treatment. During chemotherapy, you have regular contact with and support from oncologists and nurses. Everyone involved is working toward the same goal — completion of treatment with the best possible outcome. When it's over, you can feel as if you're alone, with no one to help you return to normal life or deal with fears of breast cancer recurrence.
Consider talking with a mental health professional or other health care professional who works with people who have cancer. It may also help to talk with someone who has been in the same situation. Connect with others through a hotline, support group or online community for people who have been treated for cancer.
When deciding whether chemotherapy is right for you, your doctor considers:
Genetic profile. For certain types of breast cancer such as hormone receptor positive breast cancer, your doctor may have your cancer cells tested to learn more about their genetic makeup.
Gene expression profiling tests, such as Oncotype DX, EndoPredict and MammaPrint, may help predict the risk of recurrence and give your doctor an idea of how your cancer cells might respond to chemotherapy. If it's not clear whether you'd benefit from chemotherapy, these tests can be helpful. But they're not useful for everyone and are only used in certain situations.
Make healthy choices before cancer treatment so you'll feel strong as your treatment begins. Continuing healthy choices during treatment may help minimize side effects.
Ask your doctor what side effects you can expect during and after chemotherapy. If you know what to expect, you can prepare. For example, if your chemotherapy treatment will cause infertility, you may wish to store sperm, fertilized eggs (embryos) or eggs for future use. If your chemotherapy will cause hair loss, consider a wig or a head covering, or talk to your doctor about measures that may prevent hair loss.
Most people are able to continue working and doing their usual activities during chemotherapy. Your doctor can give you an idea of how much the chemotherapy will affect your usual activities, but it's difficult to predict just how you'll feel.
Prepare by asking for time off work or help at home for the first few days after treatment. If you'll be in the hospital during chemotherapy treatment, arrange to take time off work and find someone to take care of your usual responsibilities at home.
Medications or supplements you're taking, including any herbal supplements, vitamins or over-the-counter drugs, may affect the way the chemotherapy drugs work. Your doctor may suggest alternative medications or that you not take the medications or supplements for a period before or after a chemotherapy session.
Your doctor or nurse will let you know what you can and can't eat or drink on the day of your chemotherapy session. It may help to take a family member or friend with you to the treatment session for support and companionship.
Chemotherapy for breast cancer is given in cycles. The cycle for chemotherapy can vary from once a week to once every three weeks. Each treatment session is followed by a period of recovery.
Typically, if you have early-stage breast cancer, you'll undergo chemotherapy treatments for three to six months, but your doctor will adjust the timing to your circumstances. If you have advanced breast cancer, treatment may continue beyond six months.
If you have early-stage breast cancer and you are also scheduled to receive radiation therapy, it usually happens after chemotherapy.
There are many chemotherapy drugs available. Because each person is different, your doctor will tailor the type and dose of medications (regimen) — often a combination of two or three chemotherapy drugs — to your type of breast cancer and medical history.
Breast cancer chemotherapy sessions can take place at your doctor's office, at an outpatient unit in a hospital or clinic, or at home.
Chemotherapy drugs can be given in a variety of ways, including as pills you take at home. Most often they're injected into a vein (IV). This can be done through:
Not all chemotherapy sessions are alike, but a session might follow this order:
Following a chemotherapy session, you may:
Some people feel fine after a chemotherapy session and can return to their schedules and activities. Others may feel side effects more quickly. You may want to arrange for someone to drive you home afterward, at least for the first few sessions, until you see how you feel.
After a few sessions, you may be able to predict more accurately when you'll feel fine and when you may need to cut back on activities. Marking your calendar or keeping a journal may help you track your general response to chemotherapy sessions and plan events accordingly.
Following your treatment plan closely is the best way to get the most benefit from chemotherapy. If side effects become too bothersome, discuss them with your doctor. He or she may be able to adjust the dose or type of chemotherapy medication you're receiving or prescribe other medications to help relieve some symptoms such as nausea. If the number of white cells in your blood drops, your doctor may stop your chemotherapy until your white cells return to a safe level.
Relaxation techniques such as meditation and deep breathing may help reduce stress. And exercise has been shown to help improve sleep and lessen fatigue caused by chemotherapy. Wearing wigs, hats or turbans can make hair loss less obvious.
After you complete chemotherapy treatment, your doctor will schedule follow-up visits to monitor for long-term side effects and check for cancer recurrence. Expect appointments every few months and then less frequently the longer you remain cancer-free.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    

Chemotherapy for breast cancer care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.