An ear infection, also known as acute otitis media, is an infection of the air-filled space behind the eardrum, known as the middle ear. Children are more likely than adults to get ear infections.
Ear infections often clear up on their own. So treatment might begin with managing pain and watching the issue. Sometimes, healthcare professionals prescribe antibiotics to clear the infection.
Some people have repeated ear infections. This can cause hearing problems and other serious complications.

      In an ear infection, narrow tubes that run from the middle ear to high in the back of the throat, also known as eustachian tubes, can become swollen and blocked. This can lead to mucus buildup in the middle ear. This mucus can become infected and cause ear infection symptoms.
      
Symptoms of ear infection often come on fast.
Ear infection symptoms common in children include:
Common symptoms of ear infections in adults include:
Many conditions have symptoms of an ear infection. It's important to get a good diagnosis and prompt treatment. Call your child's healthcare professional for symptoms that are severe or for:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
A bacterium or virus in the middle ear causes an ear infection. This infection often comes from another illness, such as a cold, flu or allergy. These can cause the inside the nose, throat and ears to be swollen and stuffy.

      The middle ear includes three small bones. They are the hammer, called the malleus; anvil, known as incus; and stirrup, known as stapes. The eardrum lies between the middle ear and outer ear. The middle ear connects to the back of the nose and throat by a narrow area called the eustachian tube. The snail-shaped cochlea is part of the inner ear.
      
The eustachian tubes are a pair of narrow tubes that run from each middle ear to high in the back of the throat, behind the nose. The throat end of the tubes open and close to:
Swollen eustachian tubes can become blocked, causing fluids to build up in the middle ear. This fluid can become infected and cause the symptoms of an ear infection.
In young children, these tubes are narrower and more level than adults' are. As a result, they're harder to drain and more likely to get clogged.
Two small pads of tissue high in the back of the nose, also known as adenoids, help fight off infection.
Adenoids are near the opening of the eustachian tubes. Swelling of the adenoids can block the tubes. This can lead to middle ear infection, especially in children.
Conditions of the middle ear that may be related to an ear infection or cause similar middle ear problems include:
Most ear infections don't cause long-term complications. Ear infections that happen again and again can lead to serious complications:
Spread of infection. Untreated infections or infections that don't respond well to treatment can spread to nearby tissues. Rarely, an ear infection can cause infection of the bony section behind the ear, known as mastoiditis. This infection can harm the bone and cause pus-filled cysts.
Also rarely, serious middle ear infections can spread to other tissues in the head. This can infect the brain or the membranes around the brain, an infection known as meningitis.
The following tips may lower the risk of getting ear infections:
Prevent colds and other illnesses. Teach children to wash their hands often and well. Tell children not to share cups, forks and spoons. Teach children to cough or sneeze into their elbows.
Children might have less risk of getting ill if they spend less time in group child care. Or the risk of illness might be lower if they're in child care with fewer children. Try to keep sick children home.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.