Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
It's rare, but some people may get measles after being fully vaccinated. In this small number of people, the symptoms tend to be mild. The measles vaccine, which is given in two doses, prevents measles 97% of the time on average.
In the United States, the measles vaccine is offered as a combined shot to protect against measles and other viruses.
Children and adolescents need two doses of measles vaccine. The first dose typically is given to children 12 months to 15 months old.
Children may get a measles vaccine between 6 and 11 months of age due to travel or a local outbreak of measles. But vaccines before 12 months don't give long-term protection. If a child gets the measles vaccine early, two more doses of the vaccine are needed after age 1.
The second dose is recommended between ages 4 and 6 years, before children typically start school.
If needed or preferred, children can get the second dose as soon as 28 days after the first dose of measles vaccine.
Most people born or living in the U.S. before 1957 are immune to measles because they've had it. The disease, like the current vaccine, provides protection for life.
If you're not sure whether you've been vaccinated against measles, talk to your healthcare professional.
Your healthcare team may suggest a blood test that shows if you have immunity or have had measles before. Or you can get a dose of MMR vaccine if you can't find records of having measles or being vaccinated.
The measles vaccine is safe. Most people can get the measles vaccine. Exceptions include those who have had allergic reactions or have a weakened immune system.
If you have questions about whether you should get a measles vaccine, talk to your healthcare professional. Follow your healthcare team's suggestions for you.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.