Movement disorders are a group of nervous system conditions that affect movement. They can cause either increased movements or reduced or slow movements. These movements may be under the person's control, known as voluntary. Or the movements may not be under the person's control, known as involuntary.
There are many types of movement disorders that cause different symptoms. For example, dystonia causes muscle contractions that lead to twisting of the body. Another movement disorder called chorea causes brief periods of quick involuntary movements that happen over and over. Parkinsonism causes slowness of movement with stiffness, tremors or loss of balance.
Treatments may be available to help manage the symptoms of movement disorders. Depending on the type of movement disorder, medicines, therapies or surgeries may be available. If a condition causes the movement disorder, treating the condition may help improve symptoms.
Symptoms of movement disorders vary depending on the type of the disorder. Common types of movement disorders and their symptoms include:
Chorea. Chorea causes brief, irregular, somewhat rapid, involuntary movements that happen over and over. The movements typically involve the face, mouth, trunk, arm and leg. Chorea can look like exaggerated fidgeting.
The most common genetic chorea is Huntington's disease. This disease is passed down from a parent and gets worse over time. It can be confirmed with genetic testing. Huntington's disease has three types of symptoms. They include movements that can't be controlled, trouble with thinking and mental health conditions.
Dystonia. This condition involves involuntary muscle contractions that cause twisting, irregular postures, or movements that occur again and again. Dystonia may affect the entire body or one part of the body.
The most common type of dystonia in adults is cervical dystonia. In cervical dystonia, the neck muscles contract involuntarily. This causes the head to pull to one side or to tilt forward or backward. The head also may shake, known as a tremor.
A wide variety of factors can cause movement disorders, including:
For most people with a movement disorders, there is no known cause. When healthcare professionals haven't found the exact cause, it's called idiopathic.
Your risk of some movement disorders is higher if you have a parent with the condition. Movement disorders that can be passed down through families include essential tremor, Huntington's disease, Wilson's disease and Tourette syndrome.
Other factors that may increase the risk of having a movement disorder include having certain medical conditions or taking certain medicines. Drinking large amount of alcohol, doing illegal drugs such as cocaine or not having enough of certain vitamins in the body also can increase risk.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.