Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Thumb sucking can be a difficult habit for a child to break. Understand what you can do to help your child stop sucking his or her thumb.
Thumb sucking is a common habit among children. At some point, though, you might think, "Enough is enough." Here's help encouraging your child to stop the behavior.
Babies have natural rooting and sucking reflexes, which can cause them to put their thumbs or fingers into their mouths — sometimes even before birth. Because thumb sucking makes babies feel secure, some babies might eventually develop a habit of thumb sucking when they're in need of soothing or going to sleep.
Many children stop sucking their thumbs on their own, often by age 6 or 7 months or between ages 2 and 4.
But even a child who's stopped sucking his or her thumb might go back to the behavior during times of stress.
Thumb sucking isn't usually a concern until a child's permanent teeth come in. At this point, thumb sucking might begin to affect the roof of the mouth (palate) or how the teeth line up. The risk of dental problems is related to how often, how long and how intensely your child sucks on his or her thumb.
Although some experts recommend addressing sucking habits before age 3, the American Academy of Pediatrics says treatment is usually limited to children who continue thumb sucking after turning 5.
Talk to your child about thumb sucking. You're more likely to be successful in stopping the habit if your child wants to stop and helps choose the method involved.
Sometimes paying no attention to thumb sucking is enough to stop the behavior — especially if your child uses thumb sucking to get attention. If ignoring it isn't effective, try one of these techniques:
If you're concerned about the effect of thumb sucking on your child's teeth, check with the dentist. For some kids, a chat with the dentist about why it's important to stop thumb sucking is more effective than a talk with mom or dad.
Rarely, some doctors recommend using unpleasant techniques, such as covering your child's thumbnail with a bitter substance, bandaging the thumb or covering the hand with a sock at night.
For some children, thumb sucking is an incredibly difficult habit to break. Try not to worry. Putting too much pressure on your child to stop thumb sucking might only delay the process.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.