Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
There's no sure way to tell what a child's adult height will be. But there are ways of making a guess for child growth. For instance:
Another way is to double a boy's height at age 2 or a girl's height at age 18 months.
If you're worried about your child's growth, talk with your healthcare professional. Your health professional uses a growth chart to find out if your child is growing well enough and to guess your child's adult height.
To do this, your health professional records your child's height, weight, and body mass index, also called BMI, and the measure of the outside of the child's head, called circumference. The growth chart can compare your child's growth with that of other children the same age and sex.
Keep in mind that genes play the biggest role in a child's height. And that children grow at different rates. Some children begin their growth phases early, while other children begin growing later.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.