Your healthcare professional will ask you questions about your health history and symptoms, give you a general physical, and check for pain or tenderness in your belly.
Tests and procedures that may be used include the following.
Your doctor may recommend other tests, depending on your symptoms or other conditions you may have.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your pancreatitis-related health concerns
					Start Here


There is no specific medicine to treat pancreatitis. Treatment begins with a hospital stay to manage symptoms and complications. These include:
When the symptoms and complications are under control, other treatments are used to treat underlying causes. These may include:
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) uses a dye to highlight the bile ducts on X-ray images. A thin, flexible tube with a camera on the end, called an endoscope, goes through the throat and into the small intestine. The dye enters the ducts through a small hollow tube, called a catheter, passed through the endoscope. Tiny tools passed through the catheter also can be used to remove gallstones.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) uses a dye to highlight the bile ducts on X-ray images. A thin, flexible tube with a camera on the end, called an endoscope, goes through the throat and into the small intestine. The dye enters the ducts through a small hollow tube, called a catheter, passed through the endoscope. Tiny tools passed through the catheter also can be used to remove gallstones.
Chronic pancreatitis may require additional treatments, including:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Once you leave the hospital, you can take steps to continue your recovery from pancreatitis, such as:
Alternative therapies can't treat pancreatitis, but some may help you cope with the pain from chronic pancreatitis. These include:
You'll likely see your primary care professional first. You may be referred to a specialist in the digestive system called a gastroenterologist.
Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot to discuss, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready and know what to expect from your doctor.
Questions you may have at a first visit or follow-up visit after a diagnosis may include:
In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions.
Your doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Being ready to answer them may allow more time to cover points you want to address. Your doctor may ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.