You usually don't need medical care for a common cold. But if symptoms get worse or don't go away, see your health care provider.
Most people with a common cold can be diagnosed by their symptoms. Your care provider may take a nasal or throat swab to rule out other illnesses. A chest X-ray may be ordered to rule out a lung illness.

                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
            
There's no cure for the common cold. Most cases of the common cold get better without treatment within 7 to 10 days. But a cough may last a few more days.
The best thing you can do is take care of yourself while your body heals. Care tips include:
Antibiotics do not treat cold viruses. They are used to treat illnesses caused by bacteria.
Pain relievers you can buy without a prescription can lessen the discomfort of a sore throat, headache or fever.
For adults. Nonprescription pain relief for adults includes:
For children. Guidelines for pain relief medicines for children include the following:
For adults. Adults can use decongestant drops or sprays for up to five days. These help a stuffy nose. Prolonged use can cause the return of symptoms.
For children. Children younger than 6 years old shouldn't use decongestant drops or sprays. Talk to your doctor before using nasal decongestants in children older than 6 years.
Nonprescription cough and cold medicines are used to treat the symptoms of coughs and colds, not the underlying disease. Research suggests that these medicines don't work any better to treat colds than a placebo, an inactive medicine used in research.
For adults. Follow these tips for nonprescription cough and cold medicines:
For children. Nonprescription cough and cold medicines aren't typically recommended for children. These medicines have potentially serious side effects, including fatal overdoses in children younger than 2 years old. Talk to your child's doctor before using any nonprescription cough and cold medicine in children.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
To make yourself as comfortable as possible when you have a cold, try these tips:
The science isn't clear on alternative cold remedies such as vitamin C, echinacea and zinc. Because studies of alternative cold remedies in children are limited, these remedies are most often not recommended for use in children. Here's an update on some popular choices:
Taking vitamin C is unlikely to prevent the common cold. Some studies have found that taking vitamin C before cold symptoms start may shorten the length of time you have symptoms.
Study results for echinacea are mixed. Some studies show no benefit. Others show that echinacea may lessen symptoms and shorten the recovery time when taken in the early stages of a cold. Different types of echinacea used in different studies may be a reason for mixed results.
Echinacea seems to work best if you take it when you notice cold symptoms and continue it for 7 to 10 days. It appears to be safe for healthy adults, but it can interact with many drugs. Check with your doctor before taking echinacea or any other supplement.
Several studies show that zinc supplements may reduce the length of a cold. But research has turned up mixed results about zinc and colds.
Some studies show that zinc lozenges or syrup reduce the length of a cold by about one day, especially when taken within 24 to 48 hours of the first signs and symptoms of a cold.
Zinc also has potentially harmful side effects. Intranasal zinc might cause permanent damage to the sense of smell. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a warning against using zinc-containing nasal cold remedies because they are associated with a long-lasting or permanent loss of smell.
Talk to your doctor before considering the use of zinc to prevent or reduce the length of colds.
If you or your child has cold symptoms that don't go away or get worse, make an appointment with your health care provider. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For a common cold, questions to ask may include:
Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your health care provider is likely to ask you questions, such as:
Your care provider will ask additional questions based on your answers, symptoms and needs. Preparing for questions will help you make the most of your time with the provider.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.