Your healthcare professional examines your back and assesses your ability to sit, stand, walk and lift your legs. The health professional also might ask you to rate your pain on a scale of zero to 10 and to talk about how your pain affects your daily activities.
These assessments help determine where the pain comes from and how much you can move before pain or muscle spasms force you to stop. Exams also can help rule out more-serious causes of back pain.
One or more of these tests might help pinpoint the cause of the back pain:
Most back pain gets better within a month using home treatment, especially for people younger than age 60. However, for many, the pain lasts several months.
Pain relievers and the use of heat might be all that's needed. Bed rest isn't recommended.
Continue your activities as much as you can with back pain. Try light activity, such as walking. Stop activity that increases pain, but don't avoid activity out of fear of pain. If home treatments aren't working after several weeks, your healthcare professional might recommend stronger medicines or other therapies.
Medicines depend on the type of back pain. They might include:
A physical therapist can teach exercises to increase flexibility, strengthen back and abdominal muscles, and improve posture. Regular use of these techniques can help keep pain from returning. Physical therapists also teach how to modify movements during an episode of back pain to avoid flaring pain symptoms while staying active.
Procedures used to treat back pain may include:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
A number of alternative treatments might ease back pain. Always discuss the benefits and risks with your healthcare professional before starting a new alternative therapy.
Alternative treatments may include:
If your back pain persists despite home treatment, see your healthcare professional. Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember the information you receive.
For back pain, questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.