Your eye specialist will ask you questions about factors that might be causing your symptoms. You may have an eye exam during your visit, including a vision test.
Generally, treatment for eyestrain consists of making changes in your daily habits or environment. Some people may need treatment for an underlying eye condition.
For some people, wearing glasses that are prescribed for specific activities, such as for computer use or for reading, helps reduce eyestrain. Your eye specialist may suggest that you take regular eye breaks to help your eyes focus at different distances.
Consider these tips to reduce or prevent eyestrain.
Adjust the lighting. When watching television, it may be easier on your eyes if you keep the room softly lit.
When reading printed materials or doing close work, try to position the light source behind you and direct the light onto your page or task. If you're reading at a desk, use a shaded light positioned in front of you. The shade will keep light from shining directly into your eyes.
Use artificial tears. Nonprescription artificial tears can help prevent and relieve dry eyes. Use them even when your eyes feel fine to keep them well lubricated and prevent a recurrence of symptoms.
Your eye specialist can suggest which eye drops might be best for you. Avoid eye drops with a redness remover, as these may worsen dry eye symptoms.
Eye drops that don't contain preservatives can be used as often as you need. If you use eye drops containing preservatives, you may develop a sensitivity to the preservative if you use the drops more than four times a day. If this occurs, switching to preservative-free eye drops can be helpful. However, don't use them more than four times a day.
Computer use is a common cause of eyestrain. If you work at a desk and use a computer, these self-care steps can help take some of the strain off your eyes.
Check the lighting and reduce glare. Bright lighting and too much glare can strain your eyes and make it difficult to see objects on your monitor. The worst problems are generally from sources above or behind you, including fluorescent lighting and sunlight. Consider turning off some or all of the overhead lights.
If you need light for writing or reading, use an adjustable desk lamp. Close blinds or shades, and avoid placing your monitor directly in front of a window or white wall. Place an anti-glare cover over the screen.
Some eyestrain symptoms may be relieved by natural products, such as the omega-3 fatty acids in fish oil, but further study is needed. Talk with your eye specialist if you're considering supplements to help relieve your symptoms.
If you have eye discomfort, headache or vision changes that don't improve with self-care, make an appointment with an eye specialist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For eyestrain, some basic questions to ask include:
Your eye specialist may ask a number of questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.