Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
These medicines are commonly used to treat high blood pressure, heart conditions and more.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, also called ACE inhibitors, are medicines that lower blood pressure. ACE inhibitors prevent an enzyme in the body from making angiotensin 2, which makes blood vessels narrow. The heart has to work harder when blood vessels are narrowed. That can make blood pressure go up. Angiotensin 2 also releases hormones that raise blood pressure.
There are many types of ACE inhibitors. The best one for you depends on many things, including your overall health. For example, an ACE inhibitor may help if you have chronic kidney disease.
ACE inhibitors are used to prevent, treat, or improve symptoms in conditions such as:
An ACE inhibitor sometimes is used with another blood pressure medicine, such as a diuretic or calcium channel blocker.
Do not take ACE inhibitors with any of the following medicines:
Do not take an ACE inhibitor if you are pregnant. The medicines have been linked to birth defects in babies. If you're pregnant or plan to become pregnant, ask your healthcare professional about other options to treat high blood pressure.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, also called NSAIDs, decrease how well ACE inhibitors work. Examples of NSAIDs are ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve).
Possible side effects of ACE inhibitors are:
Rarely, ACE inhibitors can cause swelling under the skin. If swelling happens in the throat, it can be life-threatening.
If you have any questions about the medicines you take, talk with your healthcare professional.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.