The small intestine and colon are parts of the digestive tract, which processes the foods you eat. The intestines take nutrients from the foods. What isn't absorbed by the intestines moves along the digestive tract and is passed out of the body as stool.
The small intestine and colon are parts of the digestive tract, which processes the foods you eat. The intestines take nutrients from the foods. What isn't absorbed by the intestines moves along the digestive tract and is passed out of the body as stool.
Diarrhea — loose, watery and possibly more-frequent passage of stool — is a common problem. Sometimes, it's the only symptom of a condition. At other times, it may be associated with other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or weight loss.
Luckily, diarrhea is usually short-lived, lasting no more than a few days. But when diarrhea lasts beyond a few days, it is usually a clue to another problem — such as medicine side effects, changes in diet, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), or a more serious disorder, including ongoing infection, celiac disease or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Symptoms associated with loose, watery stools, also called diarrhea, may include:
In children, particularly young children, diarrhea can quickly lead to dehydration. Call your doctor if your child's diarrhea doesn't improve within 24 hours or if your child:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
A number of diseases and conditions can cause diarrhea, including:
Some common risk factors for diarrhea include:
Diarrhea can cause dehydration, which can be life-threatening if not treated. Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children, older adults and those with weakened immune systems.
If you have symptoms of serious dehydration, seek medical help.
Wash your hands to prevent the spread of infectious diarrhea. To ensure adequate hand-washing:
You can help protect your infant from rotavirus, the most common cause of viral diarrhea in children, with one of two approved vaccines. Ask your baby's doctor about having your baby vaccinated.
Diarrhea commonly affects people who travel to countries with poor sanitation and contaminated food. To reduce your risk:
Watch what you drink. Drink bottled water, soda, beer or wine served in its original container. Don't drink tap water or use ice cubes. Use bottled water even for brushing your teeth. Keep your mouth closed while you shower.
Beverages made with boiled water, such as coffee and tea, are probably safe. Remember that alcohol and caffeine can aggravate diarrhea and worsen dehydration.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.