Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Trouble sleeping? Sleep aids available without a prescription might help temporarily. But lifestyle changes are usually the best approach for chronic insomnia.
You've followed the usual tips for getting enough sleep. You have a regular sleep schedule, avoid caffeine and daytime naps, and exercise regularly. You also avoid lighted screens before bed and manage stress. Still, it's been weeks since you've had a good night's sleep. Is it time for a nonprescription sleep aid? Here's what you need to know if you're considering medication to help you sleep.
Sleep aids available without a prescription can be effective for an occasional sleepless night. There are a few caveats, however.
Most sleep aids available without a prescription contain antihistamines. Tolerance to the sedative effects of antihistamines can develop quickly. The longer you take them, the less likely they are to make you sleepy.
In addition, some sleep aids available without a prescription can leave you feeling groggy and unwell the next day. This is the so-called hangover effect.
Medication interactions are possible as well, and much remains unknown about the safety and effectiveness of sleep aids available without a prescription.
Sleep aids available without a prescription are widely available. Common choices and the potential side effects include:
Store brands containing the same active ingredients as brand-name sleep aids are commonly available, too. Store brands have the same risks and benefits as their brand-name counterparts, often at a more reasonable cost.
When using nonprescription sleep aids, follow these steps:
Everyone benefits from a good night's sleep. If you continue to have trouble sleeping, talk to your health care provider. In addition to lifestyle changes, your provider might recommend behavior therapy. This type of therapy may help you learn new sleep habits and ways to make your sleeping environment more conducive to sleep. In some cases, short-term use of prescription sleep aids might be recommended as well.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.