Depending on your situation, the diagnosis of insomnia and the search for its cause may include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your insomnia-related health concerns
					Start Here


Changing sleep habits and taking care of any issues related to insomnia, such as stress, medical conditions or medicines, can result in restful sleep for many people. If these steps do not work, your doctor may recommend cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), medicines or both to improve relaxation and sleep.
Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia can help you control or stop negative thoughts and actions that keep you awake. It's usually recommended as the first treatment for people with insomnia. Typically, CBT is as effective or more effective than sleep medicines.
The cognitive part of CBT teaches you to learn and change beliefs that affect your sleep. It can help you control or stop negative thoughts and worries that keep you awake. It also may involve ending the cycle of worrying so much about getting to sleep that you cannot fall asleep.
The behavioral part of CBT helps you learn good sleep habits and stop behaviors that keep you from sleeping well.
Your doctor may recommend other strategies related to your lifestyle and sleep area to help you create habits that lead to sound sleep and daytime alertness.
Prescription sleeping pills can help you get to sleep, stay asleep or both. Doctors generally do not recommend relying on prescription sleeping pills for more than a few weeks. And medicines should not be the only treatment. But several medicines are approved for long-term use.
It's not known how long medicines can be wisely used. Rather, medicines are prescribed on a case-by-case basis, with you and your doctor weighing the benefits and risks. In general, it's best to use the lowest effective dose and not use medicines for too long.
Options for treating those who are having trouble falling asleep are:
Options for treating those who are having trouble staying asleep, waking too early or finding it hard to get back to sleep are:
Prescription sleeping pills can have side effects, such as causing daytime grogginess and creating a higher risk of falling. They also can be habit-forming. If your doctor prescribes a medicine to help you sleep, ask for more information, including possible side effects and how long you can take it.
Sleep medicines available without a prescription contain antihistamines that can make you sleepy. These medicines are not for regular use. Talk to your doctor before you take these medicines, as antihistamines may cause side effects. Side effects may include daytime sleepiness, dizziness, confusion, problems with thinking and difficulty urinating. Side effects may be worse in older adults.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
No matter your age, insomnia typically can be treated. The key often lies in changes to your routine during the day and when you go to bed.
Many people never visit their doctor or other health care provider for insomnia. They try to cope with sleeplessness on their own.
The Food and Drug Administration does not order manufacturers of dietary supplements and sleep aids to show that they work and are safe. Talk with your doctor before taking any products available without a prescription. Some products can be harmful, and some can cause harm if you're taking certain medicines.
If you're having sleep problems, you'll likely start by talking to your primary care professional. Ask if there's anything you need to do before your appointment, such as keeping a sleep diary. Take your bed partner along, if possible. Your partner can give information about how much and how well you're sleeping.
Prepare for your appointment by making a list of:
Do not hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your doctor may ask you several questions.
Common questions about daytime routine include:
Common questions about bedtime routine include:
Common questions about other issues that may affect sleep include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.