Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A life-threatening allergic reaction called anaphylaxis can cause shock, a sudden drop in blood pressure and trouble breathing. In people who have an allergy, anaphylaxis can happen minutes after exposure to a specific allergy-causing substance, called an allergen. Sometimes, there may be a delayed reaction, or anaphylaxis may happen without an obvious trigger.
Some common anaphylaxis triggers include:
If you're with someone having an allergic reaction with signs of anaphylaxis, call 911 or your local medical emergency number right away.
Don't wait to see whether symptoms get better. Seek emergency treatment right away. Severe untreated anaphylaxis can lead to death within half an hour.
Get emergency treatment even if symptoms start to improve. After anaphylaxis, it's possible for symptoms to start again. Being watched in a hospital for several hours most often is needed.
After you call 911 or your local medical emergency number, do the following:
An antihistamine pill, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl), isn't enough to treat anaphylaxis. These medicines can help relieve allergy symptoms, but they work too slowly in a severe reaction. 
Don't give a person who has anaphylaxis anything to drink.
If you've had any kind of severe allergic reaction in the past, ask your healthcare professional if you should be prescribed an epinephrine autoinjector to carry with you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.