Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Your oral health is more important than you might realize. Learn how the health of your mouth, teeth and gums can affect your general health.
Did you know that your oral health offers clues about your overall health? Did you know that problems in the mouth can affect the rest of the body? Protect yourself by learning more about the link between your oral health and overall health.
Like other areas of the body, the mouth is full of germs. Those germs are mostly harmless. But the mouth is the entry to the digestive tract. That's the long tube of organs from the mouth to the anus that food travels through. The mouth also is the entry to the organs that allow breathing, called the respiratory tracts. So sometimes germs in the mouth can lead to disease throughout the body.
Most often the body's defenses and good oral care keep germs under control. Good oral care includes daily brushing and flossing. Without good oral hygiene, germs can reach levels that might lead to infections, such as tooth decay and gum disease.
Also, certain medicines can lower the flow of spit, called saliva. Those medicines include decongestants, antihistamines, painkillers, water pills and antidepressants. Saliva washes away food and keeps the acids germs make in the mouth in balance. This helps keep germs from spreading and causing disease.
Oral germs and oral swelling and irritation, called inflammation, are linked to a severe form of gum disease, called periodontitis. Studies suggest that these germs and inflammation might play a role in some diseases. And certain diseases, such as diabetes and HIV/AIDS, can lower the body's ability to fight infection. That can make oral health problems worse.
Your oral health might play a part in conditions such as:
Certain health conditions also might affect oral health, including:
Diabetes. Diabetes makes the body less able to fight infection. So diabetes can put the gums at risk. Gum disease seems to happen more often and be more serious in people who have diabetes.
Research shows that people who have gum disease have a harder time controlling their blood sugar levels. Regular dental care can improve diabetes control.
Other conditions that might be linked to oral health include eating disorders, rheumatoid arthritis and an immune system condition that causes dry mouth called Sjogren's syndrome.
Tell your dentist about the medicines you take. And make sure your dentist knows about any changes in your overall health. This includes recent illnesses or ongoing conditions you may have, such as diabetes.
To protect your oral health, take care of your mouth every day.
Contact your dentist right away if you notice any oral health problems. Taking care of your oral health protects your overall health.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.