Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A newborn's feeding pattern can be unpredictable. Here's what, when and how to feed your baby.
Feeding a newborn is a 24-hour-a-day commitment. It's also a way to begin forming a bond with the newest member of your family. Here are tips for feeding a newborn.
Breast milk is the ideal food for babies. There are rare times when this isn't the case. If breastfeeding isn't possible, use infant formula. Healthy newborns don't need cereal, water, juice or other fluids.
Most newborns need 8 to 12 feedings a day. That's about one feeding every 2 to 3 hours.
Look for early signs your child is ready to feed. Early signs are moving the hands to the mouth, sucking on fists and fingers, and lip smacking. Crying is a later cue. The sooner you begin each feeding, the less likely you'll need to soothe a fussy baby.
When babies stop suckling, close their mouths, or turn away from the nipple or bottle, they might be full or simply taking a break. Try burping your baby or waiting a minute before offering your breast or the bottle again.
As babies get older, they tend to take in more milk in less time.
Ask your baby's healthcare professional about vitamin D supplements for the baby, especially if you're breastfeeding. Breast milk might not give the baby enough vitamin D. Vitamin D helps your baby absorb nutrients needed to build strong bones.
Your newborn may eat varied amounts. During growth spurts, your newborn might take in more at each feeding or want to be fed more often. Growth spurts often occur 2 to 3 weeks after birth. Take action if you see early signs of hunger rather than watching the time between feedings.
You might worry that your newborn isn't eating enough. But babies often seem to know just how much they need. Don't focus on how much, how often or what time your newborn eats. Instead, look for:
Contact your baby's healthcare professional if your newborn isn't gaining weight, wets fewer than six diapers a day, or shows little interest in feedings.
Hold your newborn close during each feeding. Make eye contact. Talk with a gentle voice. Use each feeding as a chance to build your newborn's sense of safety, trust and comfort.
If other family members or caregivers will be feeding your baby part of the time, tell them to use the same feeding routines you use.
If you're having trouble breastfeeding, ask a lactation consultant or your baby's healthcare professional for help. Ask for help especially if every feeding is painful or your baby isn't gaining weight. If you haven't worked with a lactation consultant, ask your healthcare professional for a referral. Or check with the obstetrics department at a local hospital.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.