Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Good skin care can keep your skin healthy and glowing. Get tips on gentle cleansing, sun safety and more.
Don't have time for intensive skin care? You can still pamper yourself. Basic skin care and healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent early aging and other skin issues. Get started with these five tips.
One of the most important ways to take care of your skin is to protect it from the sun. A lifetime of sun exposure can cause wrinkles, age spots, and other skin problems. It also can raise the risk of skin cancer.
Smoking makes skin look older and plays a part in wrinkles forming. Smoking narrows the tiny blood vessels in the outermost layers of skin. This lessens blood flow and makes skin duller. It also depletes the skin of oxygen and nutrients that are key for skin health.
Smoking damages fibers called collagen and elastin that give skin strength and suppleness. What's more, the facial expressions that people make over and over while smoking can play a role in wrinkles. These expressions include pursing the lips when breathing smoke in and squinting the eyes to keep out smoke.
Smoking also raises the risk of squamous cell skin cancer, especially on the lips. If you smoke, the best way to protect your skin is to quit. Ask your healthcare professional for tips or treatments to help you stop smoking.
Daily cleansing and shaving can be rough on your skin. Follow these tips for gentle skin care:
A balanced diet can help you look and feel your best. Eat plenty of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean proteins. Fresh fruits and vegetables may be especially helpful at preventing damage that can lead to early skin aging. Drink plenty of water to help keep your skin hydrated too. Limit foods and drinks with added sugar, processed snacks, and other refined carbohydrates. Some studies suggest that a diet high in refined carbs stripped of nutrition can speed up aging.
The connection between diet and acne isn't clear. But some research links acne with drinking lots of milk or eating lots of processed foods that raise blood sugar quickly. Limited research suggests that nutrients such as fiber and omega-3 fats show promise at helping control acne. But more studies are needed to be sure.
Too much stress can make skin more sensitive and trigger acne breakouts and other skin conditions.
To boost your chances for healthy skin and a healthy state of mind, take some steps to manage your stress:
The results for your skin might be more dramatic than you expect.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.