Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A blister is raised skin filled with clear fluid. Pressure, heat, moisture, friction or burns can cause a blister to form on the skin. For example, a blister may form on your heel when it rubs against the inside of a shoe. Or a blister may form on your thumb after you hold a kayak paddle.
Blisters are usually minor injuries that you can treat yourself.
If a blister isn't too painful, try to keep it from breaking open. Unbroken skin over a blister may provide a natural barrier to bacteria, and it decreases the risk of infection. Cover the blister with a bandage or moleskin. Moleskin is a durable fabric that can help protect blisters in high-friction areas.
Cut a piece of moleskin about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) larger than your blister. Fold the nonsticky sides together and cut a half-circle that's about the size of your blister. When you unfold the moleskin, you have a hole in the middle that's about the size of your blister. Apply the moleskin over the blister, aligning your blister with the hole you made. Then cover the blister and moleskin with gauze.
To relieve blister-related pain, drain the fluid while leaving the skin above the blister in place. If you have diabetes or poor circulation, or tend to get infections, take extra care to prevent infection.
How to drain a blister and help prevent infection:
Seek medical care if the blister looks infected. Signs of infection include expanding skin color changes that spread out from the blister, increasing pain, pus or warm skin.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.