Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight-Loss Medications Edition
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Home / RSV / Is it a Cold or Adult RSV? 3 Ways to Tell
RSV is often mistaken for a common cold in healthy adults. Here are 3 ways to tell the difference between these highly contagious illnesses.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Remember that cold you had last year? It may not have been a cold after all.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) can look a lot like the common cold. They both spread through coughs, sneezes and infected surfaces like doorknobs. In healthy adults, symptoms of both viruses are generally mild and include a runny nose, headache, sore throat or a low-grade fever.
So how can you tell whether you have a cold or RSV? Here are 3 signs to look for.
A whistling sound when you breathe is called wheezing. It’s a common symptom of RSV, but it’s less likely to happen with a mild cold. If you’re wheezing, especially if you’re also having trouble breathing, call a healthcare professional right away.
Both RSV and colds typically last a week or two. But if your symptoms get worse instead of better over time, you may be more likely to have RSV.
A blood test or mouth swab can confirm whether you have RSV. Your healthcare team may decide to do this test if your symptoms aren’t improving.
RSV can lead to serious lung infections for some people, especially adults 65 and older, or those with heart, lung or immune system issues. That’s why it’s important to watch for serious symptoms. If your cough gets worse, you have trouble breathing, or your skin looks blue or gray, get medical attention right away.
But if you’re a healthy adult and your symptoms are mild, a cold and RSV are treated the same. In both cases, you should avoid being around children, older adults, and other people who are at risk of more serious cases or complications of these viruses.
The same self-care treatment is recommended for both conditions:
If you experience symptoms, it’s important to take precautions to prevent the spread of RSV. You should protect others by washing your hands often, cleaning shared surfaces, and covering your mouth and nose when you sneeze or cough. These guidelines are the same whether you have a cold or RSV.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Mayo Clinic on High Blood Pressure offers information and tools to help you keep blood pressure from building to dangerous levels. By taking specific steps, you can live well with high blood pressure – and even keep it from ever forming. In this book, you’ll learn how high blood pressure develops, what puts you at risk, how it’s diagnosed and treated, and how to reduce your risk of conditions associated with it.
Discover more RSV content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Nathan K. LeBrasseur, Ph.D., Christina Chen, M.D.
by Mary I. O'Connor, M.D., Kanwal L. Haq, M.S.

      Dr. Takahashi specializes in geriatric care in the Division of Community Internal Medicine at Mayo Clinic in Rochester and is advancing the care of older adults through investigation of new delivery models of care.

    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Craig L. Bowron, M.D., Derek J. Lomas, M.D., Paras H. Shah, M.D.
by Wesley P. Gilliam, Ph.D., L.P., Bruce Sutor, M.D.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.
Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.