Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
When you have sensitive teeth, certain activities can cause a short, sharp pain in your teeth. Those activities often include brushing your teeth, as well eating and drinking. Sensitive teeth can happen due to tooth enamel that's worn down or tooth roots that become exposed. But sometimes other factors cause sensitivity. They might include a cavity, a cracked or chipped tooth, a worn filling, or gum disease. Using teeth whiteners also may lead to tooth sensitivity.
If you're bothered by sensitive teeth, visit your dentist. Your dentist can identify or rule out possible causes of tooth pain.
Depending on your situation, your dentist might recommend:
To help keep your teeth healthy after treatment, follow these steps:
If you grind your teeth, ask your dentist about using a mouth guard. Grinding can break teeth and lead to sensitivity.
Food and drinks that have a lot of acid can remove small amounts of tooth enamel over time. Examples include carbonated drinks, citrus fruits and wine. When you drink acidic liquids, use a straw to limit contact with your teeth. After eating or drinking something acidic, drink water to balance the acid levels in your mouth.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.