Achilles tendinitis is an injury of the Achilles (uh-KILL-eez) tendon. It can be caused by using it too much or too hard without enough rest, called overuse. Or it can develop without a clear cause. The Achilles tendon is the band of tissue that joins calf muscles at the back of the lower leg to the heel bone. 
Achilles tendinitis also is called Achilles tendinopathy. It often occurs in runners who have suddenly increased how hard or long they run. It's also common in middle-aged people who play sports, such as tennis or basketball, only on the weekends.
Most often, Achilles tendinitis can be treated with at-home care guided by a healthcare professional. Self-care steps can be helpful to prevent Achilles tendinitis from returning.
Serious cases of Achilles tendinitis can lead to tendon tears, also called ruptures. Tears might need surgery to fix them.
Achilles tendinitis pain most often begins as a mild ache in the back of the leg or above the heel after running or other sports activity. More-severe burning or aching pain might occur after running a long time, stair climbing or sprinting. Over time, there might be pain even at rest.
Achilles tendinitis can make it hard to use the affected foot. The area also might be tender or stiff, especially in the morning. The soreness usually gets better with mild activity.

      Achilles tendinitis is an injury of the Achilles (uh-KILL-eez) tendon often caused by too much use. The Achilles tendon is the band of tissue that joins calf muscles at the back of the lower leg to the heel bone.
      
If you have pain around the Achilles tendon that doesn't go away, call your healthcare professional. If the pain is suddenly severe or keeps you from moving, you may have torn your Achilles tendon. Seek medical help right away.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Repeated or intense strain on the Achilles tendon can cause Achilles tendinitis, though sometimes the cause is not clear. The Achilles tendon is the band of tissue that joins the calf muscles to the heel bone. This tendon is used while walking, running, jumping, climbing or standing on tip toes. Achilles tendinitis can occur within the middle part of the tendon or where it attaches to the heel bone.
The Achilles tendon weakens with age. That can make it easier to injure. This is true for people who play sports only on the weekends or who start running farther, faster or longer without building up over time.
Factors that can raise the risk of Achilles tendinitis include:
Achilles tendinitis can weaken the tendon. The weakness makes it more likely to tear, also called rupture. An Achilles rupture is a serious injury that often needs surgery to repair it.
It may not be possible to prevent Achilles tendinitis. But here are some ways to reduce the risk:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.