If you've been unable to conceive within a reasonable period of time, seek help from your doctor for evaluation and treatment of infertility. You and your partner should be evaluated. Your doctor will take a detailed medical history and conduct a physical exam.

        A doctor or technician places a slender catheter inside your cervix. It releases a liquid contrast material that flows into your uterus. The dye traces the shape of your uterine cavity and fallopian tubes and makes them visible on X-ray images.
        
Depending on your situation, rarely your testing might include:
Infertility treatment depends on the cause, your age, how long you've been infertile and personal preferences. Because infertility is a complex disorder, treatment involves significant financial, physical, psychological and time commitments.
Treatments can either attempt to restore fertility through medication or surgery, or help you get pregnant with sophisticated techniques.
Medications that regulate or stimulate ovulation are known as fertility drugs. Fertility drugs are the main treatment for women who are infertile due to ovulation disorders.
Fertility drugs generally work like natural hormones — follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) — to trigger ovulation. They're also used in women who ovulate to try to stimulate a better egg or an extra egg or eggs.
Gonadotropins. These injected treatments stimulate the ovary to produce multiple eggs. Gonadotropin medications include human menopausal gonadotropin or hMG (Menopur) and FSH (Gonal-F, Follistim AQ, Bravelle).
Another gonadotropin, human chorionic gonadotropin (Ovidrel, Pregnyl), is used to mature the eggs and trigger their release at the time of ovulation. Concerns exist that there's a higher risk of conceiving multiples and having a premature delivery with gonadotropin use.
Using fertility drugs carries some risks, such as:
Pregnancy with multiples. Oral medications carry a fairly low risk of multiples (less than 10%) and mostly a risk of twins. Your chances increase up to 30% with injectable medications. Injectable fertility medications also carry the major risk of triplets or more.
Generally, the more fetuses you're carrying, the greater the risk of premature labor, low birth weight and later developmental problems. Sometimes, if too many follicles develop, adjusting medications can lower the risk of multiples.
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). Injecting fertility drugs to induce ovulation can cause ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), which is rare. Signs and symptoms, which include swollen and painful ovaries, usually go away without treatment, and include mild abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
It's possible to develop a more severe form of OHSS that can also cause rapid weight gain, enlarged painful ovaries, fluid in the abdomen and shortness of breath.
Long-term risks of ovarian tumors. Most studies of women using fertility drugs suggest that there are few if any long-term risks. However, a few studies suggest that women taking fertility drugs for 12 or more months without a successful pregnancy might be at increased risk of borderline ovarian tumors later in life.
Women who never have pregnancies have an increased risk of ovarian tumors, so it might be related to the underlying problem rather than the treatment. Since success rates are typically higher in the first few treatment cycles, reevaluating medication use every few months and concentrating on the treatments that have the most success appear to be appropriate.
Several surgical procedures can correct problems or otherwise improve female fertility. However, surgical treatments for fertility are rare these days due to the success of other treatments. They include:
The most commonly used methods of reproductive assistance include:
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Dealing with infertility can be physically and emotionally exhausting. To cope with the ups and downs of infertility testing and treatment, consider these strategies:
For an infertility evaluation, you'll likely see a doctor who specializes in treating disorders that prevent couples from conceiving (reproductive endocrinologist). Your doctor will likely want to evaluate both you and your partner.
Don't hesitate to ask other questions you have.
Some potential questions your doctor or other health care provider might ask include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.