Your doctor will ask about your history of illnesses and whether any close relatives have an inherited immune system disorder. Your doctor will also perform a physical examination.
Tests used to diagnose an immune disorder include:
Blood tests. Blood tests can determine if you have typical levels of infection-fighting proteins (immunoglobulins) in your blood and measure the levels of blood cells and immune system cells. Having numbers of certain cells in your blood that are outside of the standard range can indicate an immune system defect.
Blood tests can also determine if your immune system is responding properly and producing proteins that identify and kill foreign invaders such as bacteria or viruses (antibodies).
Prenatal testing. Parents who have a child with a primary immunodeficiency disorder might want to be tested for certain immunodeficiency disorders during future pregnancies. Samples of the amniotic fluid, blood or cells from the tissue that will become the placenta (chorion) are tested for problems.
In some cases, DNA testing is done to check for a genetic defect. Test results make it possible to prepare for treatment soon after birth, if necessary.
Treatments for primary immunodeficiency involve preventing and treating infections, boosting the immune system, and treating the underlying cause of the immune problem. In some cases, primary immune disorders are linked to a serious illness, such as an autoimmune disorder or cancer, which also needs to be treated.
Stem cell transplantation. Stem cell transplantation offers a permanent cure for several forms of life-threatening immunodeficiency. Normal stem cells are transferred to the person with immunodeficiency, which results in a typically functioning immune system. Stem cells can be harvested through bone marrow, or they can be obtained from a placenta at birth (cord blood banking).
The stem cell donor — usually a parent or other close relative — must have body tissues that are a close biological match to those of the person with primary immunodeficiency. Even with a good match, however, stem cell transplants don't always work.
The treatment often requires that functioning immune cells be destroyed using chemotherapy or radiation before the transplants, leaving the transplant recipient temporarily even more vulnerable to infection.
Depending on the type of disorder, treatment may involve other therapies, including enzyme replacement therapy or transplantation of the thymus, an organ located behind the breastbone (sternum) that produces T cells.
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Most people with primary immunodeficiency can go to school and work like everyone else. Still, you might feel as if no one understands what it's like to live with the constant threat of infections. Talking to someone who faces similar challenges may help.
Ask your doctor if there are support groups in the area for people with primary immunodeficiency or for parents of children with the disease. The Immune Deficiency Foundation has a peer support program as well as information on living with primary immunodeficiency.
You'll likely start by seeing your family doctor or primary doctor. You might then be referred to a doctor who specializes in disorders of the immune system (immunologist).
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Ask a family member or friend to come with you, if possible, to help you remember the information you're given.
For primary immunodeficiency, questions to ask your doctor include:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions, as well.
Your doctor or your child's doctor is likely to ask you questions, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.