A healthcare professional often can diagnose dehydration from symptoms. For a child, a change in weight might be used in the diagnosis.
To help confirm the diagnosis and to find out how dehydrated you are, you may have other tests. These might include:
The only way to treat dehydration is to replace lost fluids and lost electrolytes. The best way to replace lost fluids depends on age, how bad the dehydration is and its cause.
For infants and children who are dehydrated from diarrhea, vomiting or fever, use water with electrolytes such as Pedialyte or Smart Water.
Start with about a teaspoon (5 milliliters) every 1 to 5 minutes and increase as your child is able to take it. It might be easier to use a syringe for very young children. Older children can drink watered-down sports drinks, such as Gatorade or Powerade. Use 1 part sports drink to 1 part water.
Most adults with mild to moderate dehydration from diarrhea, vomiting or fever can get better by drinking more water or other liquids. For children and adults, drinking full-strength fruit juice and soft drinks might make diarrhea worse.
If you work or exercise outdoors during hot or humid weather, drink cool water. Sports drinks that have electrolytes and a carbohydrate solution also may be helpful.
Severe dehydration should be treated right away, either by emergency workers who come in an ambulance or in a hospital emergency room. Salts and fluids given through a vein, called intravenously, are absorbed quickly and speed recovery.
You're likely to start by seeing your or your child's family healthcare professional. If you or your child shows signs of serious dehydration, such as having no energy or not responding to others, seek immediate care at a hospital right away.
If you have time to prepare for your appointment, here's some information to help you get ready.
For dehydration, questions might include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.