Chest pain is pain or discomfort in the area between the neck and belly. Chest pain may be sharp or dull. It might come and go, or you might always feel the pain. The exact symptoms depend on the cause.
Many different things can cause chest pain. The most life-threatening causes involve the heart or lungs. So it's important to get medical help for an accurate diagnosis.
If you think your chest pain is due to a heart attack, call 911 or your local emergency number right away.
Chest pain is often related to heart disease. Chest pain symptoms due to a heart attack or another heart condition may include:
It can be hard to tell if chest pain is due to a heart condition or something else. Usually, chest pain is less likely due to a heart condition if it happens with:
The classic symptoms of heartburn — a painful, burning sensation behind the breastbone — can be due to a health condition affecting the heart or the stomach.
If you have new or unexplained chest pain or think you're having a heart attack, call 911 or emergency medical help right away. Never ignore the symptoms of a heart attack.
If you can't get an ambulance or emergency vehicle to come to you, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only if you have no other way to get there.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Some heart-related causes of chest pain are:
Chest pain can be caused by diseases or disorders of the digestive system, including:
Many lung conditions can cause chest pain, including:
Some types of chest pain are due to injury or damage to the structures that make up the chest wall. These conditions include:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.