Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Children can have the same mental health conditions as adults, but their symptoms may be different. Know what to watch for and how you can help.
Mental illness in children can be hard for parents to notice. As a result, many children who could be helped by treatment don't get the help they need. Learn the warning signs of mental illness in children and how you can help your child.
Mental health is the overall wellness of how you think, manage your feelings and behave. A mental illness may also be called a mental health disorder. It is patterns or changes in thinking, feeling or behaving that causes distress or gets in the way of being able to act.
Mental health conditions in children are most often defined as delays or changes in thinking, behaviors, social skills or control over emotions. These problems distress children. Mental health conditions disrupt their being able to act well at home, in school or in other social settings.
It can be hard to detect mental health conditions in children because typical childhood growth is a process that involves change. Also, the symptoms of a condition may depend on a child's age. Young children may not be able to express how they feel or explain why they are behaving a certain way.
Concerns might keep parents from getting care for a child who might have a mental illness. Concerns may be about the stigma linked to mental illness, the use of medicines, the cost of treatment or problems getting help.
Mental health disorders in children may include the following:
Warning signs that your child may have a mental health disorder include:
If you're worried about your child's mental health, consult your child's healthcare professional. Describe the behaviors that concern you. Talk to your child's teachers, close friends, relatives or other caregivers to see if they've noticed changes in your child's behavior. Share this information with your child's healthcare professional.
Mental health conditions in children are diagnosed and treated based on symptoms and how the condition affects a child's daily life. To make a diagnosis, your child's healthcare professional might suggest that your child see a specialist. This might be a psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical social worker, psychiatric nurse practitioner or other mental healthcare professional. Seeing a specialist might include:
Healthcare professionals might use the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). The DSM is a guide published by the American Psychiatric Association. It provides ways to make a diagnosis based on symptoms. Another diagnostic guideline is the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) from the World Health Organization.
Diagnosing mental illness in children can take time. Young children may have trouble knowing or saying how they feel. How children matures varies. A healthcare professional may change or adjust a diagnosis over time.
Common treatments for children who have mental health conditions include:
You play a huge role in supporting your child's treatment plan. To care for yourself and your child:
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.