Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
I wake up in the middle of the night and can't get back to sleep. What can I do?
Waking up in the middle of the night is called insomnia, and it's a common problem. Mid-sleep awakenings often happen during periods of stress. Sleep aids that you can buy without a prescription rarely offer effective or long-term help for this problem.
To help stay asleep through the night and prevent insomnia, try these tips:
Sometimes insomnia is caused by a medical condition such as sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome or long-term pain. Insomnia also can be caused by a mental health condition such as depression. Treatment for one of these underlying conditions may be needed for insomnia to get better. Also, treating insomnia may help depression symptoms improve faster.
If you keep having sleep problems, talk to your healthcare professional. To find the cause and best treatment for insomnia, you may need to see a sleep specialist. Your doctor or other healthcare professional may prescribe medicine and have you try other ways to get your sleep pattern back on track. Depending on the cause of insomnia, a referral to a mental health professional may help some people.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.