In most cases, elevated calcium is found by blood tests ordered for other reasons. For example, routine blood work or testing to figure out the cause of symptoms of another condition. Your provider may diagnose hyperparathyroidism by ordering:
If blood test results show that you have high calcium levels in your blood, your health care provider will likely repeat the test. This repeated test can confirm the results after you haven't eaten for a period of time.
Many conditions can raise calcium levels. But your health care provider can diagnose hyperparathyroidism if blood tests show you also have high levels of parathyroid hormone.
After diagnosing primary hyperparathyroidism, your health care provider will likely order more tests. These can rule out possible conditions causing hyperparathyroidism, identify possible complications and determine the severity of the condition. These tests include:
Bone mineral density test. This test is done to see if you have developed osteoporosis. The most common test to measure bone mineral density is dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).
This test uses special X-ray devices to measure how many grams of calcium and other bone minerals are packed into a bone segment.
Urine test. A 24-hour collection of urine can provide information on how well your kidneys work and how much calcium is passed in your urine.
This test may help your provider determine the severity of hyperparathyroidism or diagnose a kidney disorder causing hyperparathyroidism. If a very low calcium level is found in the urine, this may mean it's a condition that doesn't need treatment.
If your health care provider recommends surgery, one of these imaging tests may be used to locate the parathyroid gland or glands that are causing problems:
Sestamibi parathyroid scan. Sestamibi is a radioactive compound that is absorbed by overactive parathyroid glands. It can be detected by a scanner that detects radioactivity.
A healthy thyroid gland also absorbs sestamibi. To keep the thyroid absorption from blocking the view of the absorption in a parathyroid tumor (adenoma), you're also given radioactive iodine. This is only absorbed by the thyroid. Using this process, the thyroid image is digitally removed so it can't be seen.
Computerized tomography (CT) scanning may be combined with the sestamibi scan to improve detection of any problems with the parathyroid glands.
Ultrasound. Ultrasound uses sound waves to create images of your parathyroid glands and surrounding tissue.
A small device held against your skin (transducer) sends out high-pitched sound waves and records the sound wave echoes as they reflect off internal structures. A computer converts the echoes into images on a monitor.
Treatment options for primary hyperparathyroidism can include watchful waiting, surgery and medications.
Your health care provider may recommend no treatment and regular monitoring if:
If you choose this watch-and-wait approach, you'll likely need regularly scheduled tests to monitor your blood-calcium levels and bone density.
Surgery is the most common treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism and provides a cure in most cases. A surgeon will remove only those glands that are enlarged or have a tumor.
If all four glands are affected, a surgeon will likely remove only three glands and perhaps a portion of the fourth — leaving some functioning parathyroid tissue.
Surgery may be done as an outpatient procedure, allowing you to go home the same day. In such cases, the surgery can be done through very small cuts (incisions) in the neck. You receive only local anesthetics to numb the area.
Complications from surgery aren't common. Risks include:
Medications to treat hyperparathyroidism include the following:
Calcimimetics. A calcimimetic is a drug that mimics calcium circulating in the blood. The drug may trick the parathyroid glands into releasing less parathyroid hormone. This drug is sold as cinacalcet (Sensipar).
Cinacalcet may be an option to treat primary hyperparathyroidism, particularly if surgery hasn't successfully cured the disorder or a person isn't a good surgery candidate.
Cinacalcet and vitamin D analogs (prescription forms of vitamin D) are used to manage secondary hyperparathyroidism in chronic kidney disease. These medications help keep the balance of calcium and phosphorus minerals so that the parathyroid glands don't have to work hard.
The most commonly reported side effects of cinacalcet are joint and muscle pain, diarrhea, nausea, and respiratory infection.
Hormone replacement therapy. For women who have gone through menopause and have signs of osteoporosis, hormone replacement therapy may help bones keep calcium. However, this treatment doesn't address the underlying problems with the parathyroid glands.
Prolonged use of hormone replacement therapy can increase the risk of blood clots and breast cancer. Work with your health care provider to evaluate the risks and benefits to help you decide what's best for you.
Some common side effects of hormone replacement therapy include breast pain and tenderness, dizziness, and headaches.
Here at the Mayo Clinic in Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery, we treat the full spectrum of parathyroid problems, and that ranges from the simplest primary hyperparathyroidism to the most complex cases. What they are are four little glands that regulate the calcium. And most often it's just one of them that develops a tumor of it. We utilize multimodal imaging, meaning various types of imaging to identify where the abnormal parathyroid is located. And that can include various imaging techniques such as ultrasound, parathyroid sestamibi scan, which is a nuclear medicine imaging. We use four-dimensional CT scan, which is an advanced CT scan, imaging of the neck and parathyroid glands. And finally, cutting edge imaging such as choline PET scan. So PET choline is one of the newest imaging modalities that's out there. It requires generation of a choline isotope on site, and so this is not widely available. It's really only available at a few centers across the country. And so, with this type of scan, we can find parathyroid glands that are otherwise missed by traditional imaging techniques. Once that step is complete, then the patient can very confidently move towards the next step, which is treatment. Patients can come into the office feeling a variety of symptoms that are generally nonspecific, but rather debilitating for them. In many of these cases, we're able to treat the hyperparathyroidism and watch these symptoms literally go away. What we strive for is really to have a very efficient and effective itinerary for patients and know they're going to be operated on by very high volume experienced parathyroid surgeons and feel confident that they're going to come here and get the cure they need and deserve.
If you and your health care provider have chosen to monitor, rather than treat, your primary hyperparathyroidism, the following suggestions can help prevent complications:
Monitor how much calcium and vitamin D you get in your diet. Restricting how much calcium you eat or drink is not recommended for people with hyperparathyroidism.
The daily recommended amount of calcium for adults ages 19 to 50 and men ages 51 to 70 is 1,000 milligrams (mg) of calcium a day. That calcium recommendation increases to 1,200 mg a day for women age 51 and older and men age 71 and older.
The daily recommended amount of vitamin D is 600 international units (IUs) of vitamin D a day for people ages 1 to 70 and 800 IUs a day for adults age 71 and older. Talk to your provider about dietary guidelines that are right for you.
In most cases, elevated calcium is detected by blood tests your health care provider has ordered as part of a routine screening, tests for an unrelated condition or tests to identify the cause of very general symptoms.
Talk to your provider about your test results if they show you have high levels of calcium. Questions you might ask include:
To understand the effect of hyperparathyroidism on your overall health, your provider may ask you questions about possible mild signs or symptoms, including:
Your health care provider may ask you additional questions about what medications you're taking and what your diet is like to help determine if you get adequate amounts of calcium and vitamin D.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.