Flu, also called influenza, is an infection of the nose, throat and lungs, which are part of the respiratory system. The flu is caused by a virus. Influenza viruses are different from the "stomach flu" viruses that cause diarrhea and vomiting.
Most people with the flu get better on their own. But sometimes, influenza and its complications can be deadly. To help protect against seasonal flu, you can get an annual flu shot. Although the vaccine isn't 100% effective, it lowers the chances of having severe complications from the flu. This is especially true for people who are at high risk of flu complications.
Aside from the vaccine, you can take other steps to help prevent infection with the flu. You can clean and disinfect surfaces, wash hands, and keep the air around you moving.

                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
            
The viruses that cause flu spread at high levels during certain times of the year in the Northern and Southern hemispheres. These are called flu seasons. In North America, flu season usually runs between October and May.
Symptoms of the flu such as a sore throat and a runny or stuffy nose are common. You may also get these symptoms with other illness such as a cold. But colds tend to start slowly, and the flu tends to come on quickly, within two or three days after you come in contact with the virus. And while a cold can be miserable, you usually feel much worse with the flu.
In children, these symptoms may show up more generally as being fussy or irritable. Children also are more likely than adults to have ear pain, feel sick to the stomach, vomit or have diarrhea with the flu.
In some cases, people have eye pain, watery eyes or find that light hurts their eyes.
Most people who get the flu can manage it at home and often don't need to see a healthcare professional.
If you have flu symptoms and are at risk of complications, see your healthcare professional right away. Starting antiviral medicine within two days after your symptoms show up may shorten the length of your illness and help prevent more-serious problems.
If you have emergency symptoms of the flu, get medical care right away. For adults, emergency symptoms can include:
Emergency symptoms in children include all the symptoms seen in adults, as well as:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Influenza is caused by viruses. These viruses travel through the air in droplets when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks. You can inhale the droplets directly. Or you can pick up the virus from touching an object, such as a computer keyboard, and then touching your eyes, nose or mouth.
It's possible to spread the virus to others from about a day before symptoms appear until about 5 to 7 days after they start. This is called being contagious. Children and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for a slightly longer time.
Influenza viruses are constantly changing, with new strains appearing often.
A person's first flu infection gives some long-term protection against similar strains of flu. But the vaccines offered each year are made to match the flu virus strains that are most likely to spread that season. The protection these vaccines offer lasts for months in most people.
There are a range of factors that may raise your risk of catching a flu virus or having complications from a flu infection.
Seasonal influenza tends to have worse outcomes in young children, especially those age 2 years and younger. Adults older than age 65 also tend to have worse outcomes.
People who live in facilities with many other residents, such as nursing homes, are more likely to get the flu.
An immune system that doesn't quickly clear out flu virus may raise the risk of getting the flu or getting flu complications. People may have a weakened immune system response from birth, due to illness, or due to disease treatment or medicine.
Chronic conditions may increase the risk of influenza complications. Examples include asthma and other lung diseases, diabetes, heart disease, nervous system diseases, previous history of stroke, metabolic disorders, problems with the airway, and kidney, liver or blood disease.
In the United States, people who are Native American or Alaska Native, Black, or Latino may have a higher risk of needing care in the hospital for influenza.
Young people on long-term aspirin therapy are at risk of developing Reye's syndrome if infected with the influenza virus.
Pregnant people are more likely to develop influenza complications, particularly in the second and third trimesters.
People with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or higher have an increased risk of flu complications.
If you're young and healthy, the flu usually isn't serious. Although you may feel awful while you have it, the flu usually goes away in a week or two with no lasting effects.
But people at high risk may develop other health problems after the flu, called complications.
Getting another infection can be a complication of getting the flu. That includes illnesses such as croup and sinus or ear infections. Lung infections are another complication. Infection of the heart muscle or heart lining may happen after getting the flu. And in some cases, people may have infection of the central nervous system.
Mayo Clinic offers flu shots in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual flu vaccination for people age 6 months and older who do not have a medical reason to avoid the vaccine.
The 2024-2025 seasonal flu vaccines each provide protection against three influenza viruses that researchers expect to be the most common this flu season.
The vaccine is available as a shot, a jet injector and a nasal spray.
For older children and adults, the flu shot is usually given in a muscle in the arm. Younger children may get the flu shot in a thigh muscle.
If you are an adult under the age of 65, you can choose to get your vaccine with a jet injector. Instead of a needle, this device uses a high-pressure, narrow stream of fluid to go through the skin.
The nasal spray is approved for people between ages 2 and 49 years old. It isn't recommended for some groups, such as:
Check with your healthcare team to see if you need to be cautious about getting a nasal spray flu vaccine. If you can take the nasal spray flu vaccine, you may be able to do so, or give it to an eligible child, without seeing a healthcare professional.
There also are vaccines offered called high-dose or adjuvanted flu vaccines. These vaccines may help some people avoid the need for care in the hospital due to influenza. People over age 65 can get these vaccines. These vaccines also are recommended for people age 18 and older who have a solid organ transplant and take medicine to weaken their immune response.
If you have an egg allergy, you can still get a flu vaccine.
The first time children between 6 months and 8 years get a flu vaccine, they may need two doses given at least four weeks apart. After that, they can receive single annual doses of the flu vaccine. Check with your child's healthcare professional.
Also, check with your healthcare team before receiving a flu vaccine if you had a serious reaction to a previous flu vaccine. People who have had Guillain-Barre syndrome also should check with a healthcare professional before getting the flu vaccine. And if you feel sick when you go to get the shot, check with your healthcare team to see if you should delay getting the vaccine.
The influenza vaccine isn't 100% effective. So it's important to take steps to lower the spread of infection, including:
If you're sick, stay home until you feel better and have had no fever for a full 24 hours, and you haven't taken medicine for fever during that time. If your fever returns or you start to feel worse, stay apart from others until your symptoms improve and you are fever-free without medicine for 24 hours. Doing so will lower your chance of infecting others.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.