Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a rare disease that causes swelling, also called inflammation, of small blood vessels. This condition mainly affects blood vessels in the nose, sinuses, throat, lungs and kidneys. But it can affect any organ.
GPA used to be called Wegener granulomatosis. It's one of a group of blood vessel diseases called vasculitis. GPA slows blood flow to some organs. The affected tissues can develop inflamed areas called granulomas. Granulomas can damage these organs and affect how they work.
Symptoms of GPA vary. At first, the symptoms can seem like those of a cold. Other symptoms depend on which organs the disease affects. The cause of GPA isn't clear, but the immune system may play a role.
It's important for healthcare professionals to find and treat GPA as soon as possible. Early treatment can help people live full lives. Without treatment, the condition can lead to organ damage that sometimes is fatal.
Symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) can vary widely from person to person. Symptoms can start quickly, or they can develop over months.
Early on, GPA can cause general symptoms such as:
Specific symptoms depend on what parts of the body GPA affects.
If GPA affects the ears, nose or throat, symptoms can include:
If GPA affects the lungs or windpipe, symptoms can include:
For some people, the disease affects only the lungs. Without treatment, GPA can lead to lung bleeding and scarring over time.
If GPA affects the kidneys, you might not have symptoms. Or you might have symptoms such as:
If GPA affects the eyes, symptoms can include:
GPA symptoms can seem like those of some other health conditions. Early symptoms may feel like a cold or flu and can last for weeks or longer. See your healthcare professional if you have a runny nose that doesn't get better with cold medicines. Be sure to get a healthcare checkup if you have a runny nose along with:
The disease can become worse quickly. Without treatment, it can lead to other serious health conditions called complications. That's why it's important for a healthcare professional to find it and start treatment early.
The exact cause of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) isn't clear. The immune system may play a role. Some white blood cells may not function as they should, and they may be involved in the disease. The immune system makes proteins called antibodies that protect the body from germs such as viruses and bacteria. GPA has been linked with the presence of certain antibodies that attack healthy cells by mistake.
The condition can lead to inflamed, narrowed blood vessels and harmful, inflamed tissue masses called granulomas. Granulomas can destroy healthy tissue. And narrowed blood vessels lower the amount of blood and oxygen that reaches tissues and organs.
GPA doesn't spread from person to person. And it likely doesn't pass from parents to children through genes.
Age is a risk factor for granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Most often, the disease affects people between the ages of 40 and 65. But it can happen at any age.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) can lead to other health conditions called complications. The complications depend on which organs or body parts the disease affects. They can include:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.