Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
You can tell the difference between a cold and a seasonal allergy by key symptoms and how regularly symptoms appear.
Colds are caused by your immune system's response when you catch a virus. Seasonal allergies are triggered by your immune system's response to allergens, such as pollen.
Some symptoms of colds and allergic reactions are the same, such as a runny or stuffy nose, and sneezing.
For example, people with seasonal allergies almost never have a sore throat or a cough. Viral infections, on the other hand, often do cause this symptom. And people with seasonal allergies don't usually have a fever, but those with a cold often do. With a seasonal allergy, you may notice puffy eyelids and dark marks under your eyes.
A cold may last 3 to 10 days in adults, although a cough may last for a couple of weeks longer. You can treat the symptoms of the common cold with rest and added fluids. Pain relievers may help with aching muscles or throat pain. Nasal rinses or sprays may help with congestion or runny nose.
Seasonal allergies may last several weeks. You can treat seasonal allergies with a nasal saline rinse, antihistamines or nasal steroid sprays. Avoid exposure to allergens where possible.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.