A bee sting is a common outdoor nuisance. You can take several steps to avoid stings from bees, hornets and wasps. If you're stung, basic first aid can help ease the pain of a mild or moderate reaction. You may need emergency medical help for a severe reaction.
Bee sting symptoms can range from pain and swelling to a life-threatening allergic reaction. Having one type of reaction doesn't mean you'll always have the same reaction every time you're stung or that the next reaction will be more severe.
Make an appointment to see a healthcare professional if:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
A bee sting is an injury caused by bee venom. To sting, a bee jabs a barbed stinger into the skin. The stinger releases venom. The venom has proteins in it that cause pain and swelling around the sting area.
Generally, insects such as bees and wasps aren't aggressive and only sting in self-defense. In most cases, this results in one or perhaps a few stings. Some types of bees tend to swarm, stinging in a group. An example of this type of bee is Africanized bees.
The following tips may help reduce your risk of a bee sting:
Know what to do when bees or other stinging insects are nearby:
People who have a severe reaction to a bee sting have on average a 50% chance of anaphylaxis the next time they're stung. Talk to a healthcare professional about prevention measures such as allergy shots to avoid a similar reaction if you get stung again.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.