A breast self-exam for breast awareness is a check of your breasts that you do on your own. To help increase your breast awareness, you use your eyes and hands to learn if there are any changes to the look and feel of your breasts.
If you notice new breast changes, discuss them with your healthcare professional. Most breast changes detected during a self-exam for breast awareness aren't something serious. However, some changes may signal something serious, such as breast cancer.
Most medical experts don't recommend routine breast self-exams as a part of breast cancer screening. That's because breast self-exams haven't been shown to be effective in reducing deaths from breast cancer.
Still, healthcare professionals believe there is value in being familiar with your own breasts. This way, you may understand what's typical and can report changes right away. Considering the new breast changes, your healthcare professional can decide if you need diagnostic breast imaging. Finding a breast change and reporting it to your healthcare team could help find breast cancer when it's small. A small breast cancer that's caught early could require less intensive treatment.
A breast self-exam for breast awareness helps you understand the typical look and feel of your breasts. If you notice a change in your breasts or if you notice one breast is different from the other, you can report it to your healthcare professional.
There are many conditions that can cause changes in the breasts, including breast cancer.
Report any changes you find to your healthcare professional, even if you recently had a mammogram or have one scheduled soon. It's possible for a mammogram to miss a small cancer or a cancer located in a spot that's hard to see. If you find something concerning, your health professional might recommend imaging tests to check it out. These might include a diagnostic mammogram or an ultrasound.
The breast self-exam technique isn't always a reliable way to detect breast cancer. Self-exams may be difficult if you have fibrocystic breasts, which causes the breast tissue to feel lumpy. However, a significant number of people report that the first sign of their breast cancer was a new breast lump they found on their own. For this reason, healthcare professionals recommend being familiar with the regular look and feel of your breasts.

                            There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                            Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                        

                        Sign up for free and receive the latest on breast cancer treatment, care
                        and management.
                    


ErrorEmail field is required
                        


ErrorInclude a valid email
                            address
                        
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                            You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                            requested in your inbox.
                        
A breast self-exam for breast awareness is a safe way to become familiar with the typical look and feel of your breasts.
However, there are some limitations and risks, including:
Most of the changes or lumps people find in their breasts aren't cancerous. Still, finding something suspicious in your breast can make you worry about what it may mean. You may endure several days of worry until you can see your healthcare professional.
If you discover a suspicious lump, you may need other tests and procedures to check it out. This might include imaging tests such as a diagnostic mammogram or a breast ultrasound. You also may have a procedure to remove breast tissue for testing, called a biopsy. If it turns out the lump isn't cancer, you might feel that you've had an invasive procedure without needing one.
A breast self-exam doesn't replace a breast exam by your healthcare professional, called a clinical breast exam. It also doesn't replace a screening mammogram. Becoming familiar with the typical look and feel of your breasts can be used with breast cancer screening but can't replace it.
To prepare for your breast self-exam for breast awareness:
Before you begin breast self-exams for breast awareness, you may find it helpful to discuss the instructions and technique with your healthcare professional.
Hormone levels fluctuate each month during the menstrual cycle. This causes changes in breast tissue, such as swelling, and may cause breast tenderness. Breast swelling begins to decrease at the start of a period. The best time to perform a self-exam for breast awareness is usually the week after your period ends.
Sit or stand shirtless and braless in front of a mirror with your arms at your sides. To inspect your breasts visually, do the following:
If you have a vision condition that makes it difficult for you to visually inspect your breasts, ask a trusted friend or a family member to help you.
To perform a breast self-exam for breast awareness, follow a pattern that ensures you cover your entire breast. For instance, imagine that your breasts are divided into equal wedges, like pieces of a pie. Move your fingers along each piece in toward your nipple.
To perform a breast self-exam for breast awareness, follow a pattern that ensures you cover your entire breast. For instance, imagine that your breasts are divided into equal wedges, like pieces of a pie. Move your fingers along each piece in toward your nipple.
Common ways to perform the manual part of the breast exam include:
When examining your breasts, some general tips to keep in mind include:
If you have a condition that makes it difficult for you to examine your breasts using this technique, you likely can still do a breast self-exam. Ask your healthcare professional to show you ways you can examine your breasts.
Finding a change in your breast isn't a reason to panic. Some breast changes are typical. For instance, if you have periods, you might notice that your breasts change at certain times in the menstrual cycle. It's common for the breasts to feel different in different places. A firm ridge along the bottom of each breast is typical, for instance. The look and feel of your breasts will likely change as you age.
Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you notice:
Your healthcare professional may suggest more tests and procedures to investigate breast changes. Tests and procedures may include a clinical breast exam, a mammogram and an ultrasound.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.