Medication overuse headaches are the result of the long-term use of medicines needed to treat headaches such as migraines. It's OK to take pain relievers for headaches sometimes. But people who take them more than a couple of days a week may get medication overuse headaches, also called rebound headaches.
For people with a headache condition such as migraine, most medicines for pain relief can have this effect. This doesn't seem true for people who have never had a headache condition. But people with a history of headaches who take pain relievers regularly for another condition, such as arthritis, may get medicine overuse headaches.
Medication overuse headaches most often go away after stopping the pain medicine. This can make it challenging to manage pain in the short term. But your healthcare professional can help you find ways to
prevent medication overuse headaches.
Symptoms of medication overuse headaches depend on the type of headache being treated and the medicine used. Medication overuse headaches tend to:
It's common to have some headaches. But take headaches seriously. Some types of headaches can be life-threatening.
Seek immediate medical care if your headache:
Talk with your healthcare professional if:
Experts don't know exactly why medication overuse headaches happen. The risk of getting these headaches varies depending on the medicine. But most headache medicines can lead to medication overuse headaches, including:
Combined pain relievers. Pain relievers you can buy at the store that combine caffeine, aspirin and acetaminophen (Excedrin) have a moderate risk of causing medication overuse headaches.
This group also includes combined prescription medicines that have the sedative butalbital (Butapap, Lanorinal, others). Medicines with butalbital have a high risk of causing medication overuse headaches. It's best not to take them to treat headaches.
Migraine medicines. Triptans (Imitrex, Zomig, others) used to treat migraine have a high risk of medication overuse headaches. The ergot dihydroergotamine (Migranal, Trudhesa) appears to have a lower risk of causing medication overuse headaches.
A newer group of migraine medicines known as gepants don't seem to cause medication overuse headaches. Gepants include ubrogepant (Ubrelvy), rimegepant (Nurtec ODT) and zavegepant (Zavzpret).
Risk factors for getting medication overuse headaches include:
To help prevent medication overuse headaches:
Taking care of yourself can help prevent most headaches.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.