Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Thinking about a planned home birth? Understand the possible risks and how to plan and prepare for the big day.
If you're considering a planned home birth, you probably have questions. Is it safe? Will you need a midwife or doula? How do you create a backup plan? Find out what's involved and what to consider as you decide if delivering your baby at home is right for you.
The choice of a planned home birth may be appealing for a variety of reasons, including:
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists cautions against a planned home birth if:
During a planned home birth, you might need to go to a hospital if problems develop during labor and delivery. Your health care provider might advise you go to a hospital if:
Most pregnant people who choose to have planned home births deliver without problems. But research suggests that planned home births are associated with a higher risk of infant death, seizures and nervous system disorders than planned hospital births.
There are several factors that might reduce the risks of these problems, including having:
It's important to talk to your health care provider before you make a decision about a planned home birth. For some people with certain health conditions, as well as those who have not given birth before, the risks of a planned home birth may be higher than they are for others.
One of the most important steps in planning for a home birth is finding well-trained health care providers to assist you. It is common for a midwife to provide care during a home birth. If you choose a midwife, make sure that person is one of the following:
Although it is uncommon, in some areas, doctors who specialize in obstetrics may be available to assist with home births. Make sure the health care provider you choose has easy access to doctors or specialists at a nearby hospital.
The American Academy of Pediatrics also recommends having present at least one trained person whose primary responsibility is caring for your newborn.
If you're interested in having more help, consider hiring a professional labor assistant (doula).
If you haven't done so before, consider taking a childbirth class to help you prepare, so you know what to expect during labor and delivery. Such a class also can give you time to talk with other expectant parents and come up with more questions or topics to consider for your birth plan.
Discuss your birth plan with your health care provider. Go over your expectations and make a list of the equipment and supplies you'll need to meet those expectations and ensure a safe experience for you and your baby. Share the plan with others who will be supporting you during labor and delivery. This will help everyone understand what you want, so you can feel safe, supported and confident in your birth experience.
Make the following preparations for a smooth transition to a hospital, if you need it:
Hospitals or certified birth centers are the safest settings for delivery. However, you have the right to make an informed decision about where you prefer to deliver your baby. Keep in mind that life-threatening problems can occur during labor and delivery. In those cases, the need to take you and your baby to a hospital could delay care. That could put your lives at risk. Understand the risks and benefits of a home birth before you make a decision about where to deliver. 

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.