Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Learn what first-aid steps to take if you have a toothache.
Tooth decay is the most common cause of toothaches for most children and adults. Bacteria that live in your mouth thrive on the sugars and starches in the food you eat. These bacteria form a sticky plaque that clings to the surface of your teeth.
Acids produced by the bacteria in plaque can eat through the hard, white coating on the outside of your teeth known as enamel. This creates an area of decay called a cavity. The first sign of decay may be pain when you eat something sweet, very cold or very hot. Sometimes decay will show as a brown or white spot on the tooth.
A toothache often needs some sort of treatment by your dentist.
Until you can see your dentist, try these self-care tips for a toothache:
Previous advice included putting a small amount of a nonprescription pain reliever containing benzocaine directly to the irritated tooth and gum for temporary relief. But benzocaine has been linked to a rare and serious, sometimes deadly, condition called methemoglobinemia (met-hee-muh-GLO-buh-nee-mee-uh). This condition lowers the amount of oxygen that the blood can carry. So follow these guidelines:
Call your dentist or other doctor right away if you have any of the following with a toothache:
If you have trouble breathing or swallowing, go to the emergency department at a hospital.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.