A health care provider might ask about symptoms and do an exam. The exam might include feeling for tenderness in the nose and face and looking inside the nose.
Other ways to diagnose acute sinusitis and rule out other conditions include:
Most cases of acute sinusitis get better on their own. Self-care is usually all that's needed to ease symptoms.
The following might help ease sinusitis symptoms:
Pain relievers. Try acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or aspirin available without a prescription.
Use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than 3, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This is because aspirin has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition, in such children.
Antibiotics don't treat viruses, which are the usual cause of acute sinusitis. Even if bacteria caused the acute sinusitis, called a bacterial infection, it might clear up on its own. So a health care provider might wait and see if the acute sinusitis gets worse before prescribing antibiotics.
But, if you have severe, worsening or long-lasting symptoms, your symptoms might need to be treated with antibiotics. Always take the whole course of antibiotics even after symptoms get better. Stopping antibiotics early might cause symptoms to come back.
For sinusitis caused or made worse by allergies, allergy shots might help. This is known as immunotherapy.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
A neti pot is a container designed to rinse the nasal cavity.

A neti pot is a container designed to rinse the nasal cavity.
These steps can help relieve sinusitis symptoms:
No alternative therapies have been proved to ease the symptoms of acute sinusitis. Products that have certain herbs in them might be of some help. These therapies have cowslip, gentian root, elderflower, verbena and sorrel in them.
Check with a health care provider before taking herbal or dietary supplements. Be sure they're safe and that they won't get in the way of medicines you take.
Here's information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For acute sinusitis, questions to ask your provider include:
Be sure to ask all the questions you have.
Your care provider is likely to ask you questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.