At Mayo Clinic, a world-class team of doctors and specialists will see you in one place, at one time. They'll listen to your story, learn your goals, and work together to accurately diagnose and treat your condition so you can get back to your life as quickly as possible.
[SAMEER KEOLO, M.D., RADIATION ONCOLOGIST]
The first thing to do when a patient is diagnosed is I tell that patient, this is a scary moment. We understand that. Take a deep breath.
[ERIC MOORE M.D., DIVISION CHAIR AND SURGEON]
As you come to see me as a patient, we don't work on a formula. We work on a patient. We want to know you. We want to know who you are. We want to know what you do day to day. We want to know what's important to you.
It's always challenging when patients have to decide what type of treatment is best for them. And that's why at Mayo Clinic, they don't have to make that decision alone.
[SARAH MCLAUGHLIN, M.D., SURGICAL ONCOLOGIST]
You have all of your providers in a truly integrated, multidisciplinary environment, under one roof, in one medical record. And what that means is that the communication is wide open between those providers. The synergy between the providers is really felt in the care experience that the patient has.
[JUDY BOUGHEY, M.D., SURGICAL ONCOLOGIST]
All of my colleagues are top notch. When you look at what are the latest advances in research, what are the latest drugs that are coming on the market, what are the latest techniques being used in surgery and radiation, many of those pivotal trials have been run by colleagues across the Mayo Clinic campuses.
[MATTHEW GOETZ, M.D., MEDICAL ONCOLOGIST]
We have clinical trials that are emanating out of our own science. Work that is ongoing in our laboratories to actually discover new things about cancer that then leads to a new drug or a new drug combination that Mayo Clinic investigators are taking forward for Mayo Clinic only patients.
[ERIC MOORE M.D., DIVISION CHAIR AND SURGEON]
We adopt cutting edge technology very quickly. And we're able to expand on its use and eventually develop further uses for it.
[CHEE-CHEE STUCKY, M.D., SURGICAL ONCOLOGIST]
If I were to tell somebody what to look for when they're looking for a care center, I would say you need to find a place where you truly believe that the physicians who are taking care of you have your best interests at heart. They're the best at treating the disease that you have, and they have a passion for treating it.
Your Mayo Clinic care team includes the best specialists in every medical field you need, focused on you. No matter what serious or complex health challenge you're facing, you can be confident that you're receiving the most advanced care at Mayo Clinic.
Getting your diagnosis right the first time means you can start on the most effective treatment plan. We are continuously developing better tools for diagnosis and treatment, so you get answers, options, and hope where none may have existed before.
“I have never seen medical professionals conduct themselves like the professionals at Mayo Clinic. It was a humbling feeling to be treated with such respect and such care.”
A team of specialists will thoroughly and carefully evaluate your condition and work together to create a customized plan to meet your goals. Our team approach makes your experience less complicated, so you can focus on getting better.
Mayo Clinic patients are often the first to benefit from our research. Right now, our doctors are working on more than 12,000 clinical studies, researching new treatments and therapies for the world's most challenging and complex medical issues.
Start an appointment request with Mayo Clinic.
Find out more about your insurance coverage.
What you need to know about appointments and referrals.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.