Swimmer's ear is an infection in the outer ear canal. The outer ear canal runs from the eardrum to the outside the head. Swimmer's ear is often brought on by water that stays in the ear. The moisture helps bacteria grow.
Putting fingers, cotton swabs or other objects in the ears can damage the thin layer of skin lining the ear canal. This also can lead to swimmer's ear.
Swimmer's ear also is called otitis externa. Ear drops usually can treat swimmer's ear. Treating swimmer’s ear quickly can help prevent complications and more-serious infections.

      Redness of the ear canal, which can be hard to see on Black and brown skin; ear pain; draining fluids and pus coming from the ear are signs of swimmer's ear, also called otitis externa. Without treatment, the infection can spread to nearby tissue and bone.
      
Swimmer's ear symptoms are usually mild at first. But they can get worse if the infection isn't treated or spreads. Doctors often classify swimmer's ear as mild, moderate and advanced.
Make an appointment to get medical help for even mild symptoms of swimmer's ear.
Get urgent medical help or go to an emergency room for:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Swimmer's ear is an infection that's usually caused by bacteria. It's less common for a fungus or virus to cause swimmer's ear.
The outer ear canals have built-in ways of staying clean and free of infection:
Having swimmer's ear means the ear's natural defenses have not worked well. The conditions that often play a role in infection include:
The following can increase the risk of swimmer's ear:
Swimmer's ear usually isn't serious if treated quickly. But complications that can happen include:
Follow these tips to avoid swimmer's ear:
Keep ears dry. After swimming or bathing, tip your head from side to side with the ear on each side facing down. This helps water drain from the ear canal.
Dry only the outer ear by wiping it gently with a soft towel. You also can safely dry the outer ear canal with a blow dryer. Use the lowest setting and hold it at least 1 foot (about 0.3 meters) away from the ear.
At-home treatment to prevent swimmer's ear. If you know you don't have a punctured eardrum, you can make ear drops by mixing 1 part white vinegar to 1 part rubbing alcohol. Using this mixture helps the ear dry and prevents the growth of bacteria and fungi.
Before and after swimming, pour 1 teaspoon (about 5 milliliters) of the mixture into each ear. Let it drain back out.
Earwax usually moves to the opening of the ear canal. There it's easy to wash away with a damp cloth. It's best to leave it alone and let earwax do its job.
If you have too much earwax or it's blocking your ear canal, you can do two things rather than digging it out. See your healthcare professional or use an at-home cleaning method. Follow these steps for safe at-home cleaning:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.