Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Despite many studies, it isn't clear whether cinnamon helps lower blood sugar in people with diabetes. Some studies of cinnamon have shown a benefit. Others haven't.
Many of those research studies included different doses and different types of cinnamon. That makes it hard to compare the results. It's possible that cinnamon might help the body use insulin more efficiently. But more research is needed to determine if, and how, cinnamon supplements might help people with diabetes.
For most people, cinnamon supplements seem to be safe, at least in small amounts for short-term use. But higher amounts used for longer periods of time may trigger side effects such as gastrointestinal problems or allergic reactions. It also may cause problems for people who have liver disease. Talk to your health care provider before taking any supplements. Together, you and your provider can make sure the supplements are safe for you, and that they won't affect any medicine you're already taking.
It's also important to remember that no single supplement alone can treat diabetes. Diabetes management includes healthy eating, regular exercise, blood sugar monitoring, and sometimes, diabetes medications or insulin therapy.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.