Liver function tests are blood tests used to help find the cause of your symptoms and monitor liver disease or damage. The tests measure the levels of certain enzymes and proteins in your blood.
Some of these tests measure how well the liver is performing its regular functions of producing protein and clearing bilirubin, a blood waste product. Other liver function tests measure enzymes that liver cells release in response to damage or disease.
Irregular liver function test results don't always mean liver disease. A member of your health care team will typically explain your results and what they mean.
Liver function tests check the levels of certain enzymes and proteins in your blood. Levels that are higher or lower than usual can mean liver problems. The pattern and degree of elevation of these tests along with the overall clinical picture can provide hints to the underlying cause of these problems.
Some common liver function tests include:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
The blood sample for liver function tests is usually taken from a vein in your arm. The main risk associated with blood tests is soreness or bruising at the site of the blood draw. Most people don't have serious reactions to having blood drawn.
Certain foods and medicines can affect the results of your liver function tests. Your doctor will probably ask you to avoid eating food and taking some medicines before your blood is drawn.
The blood sample for liver function tests is usually drawn through a small needle inserted into a vein in the bend of your arm. The needle is attached to a small tube, to collect your blood. You may feel a quick pain as the needle is inserted into your arm and have some short-term soreness at the site after the needle is removed.
Your blood goes to a laboratory for analysis. If the lab analysis happens on-site, you could have your test results within hours. If your doctor sends your blood to an off-site laboratory, you may get the results within several days.
Standard range blood test results for typical liver function tests include:
These results are typical for adult men. Standard range results may be different from laboratory to laboratory. They also might be slightly different for women and children.
Your health care team uses the results to help diagnose your condition or decide on treatment you might need. Sometimes, additional blood tests and imaging may be used to help make a diagnosis. If you already have liver disease, liver function tests can help determine how your disease is progressing and if you're responding to treatment.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.