Tests used to help diagnose gangrene include:
Tissue that has been damaged by gangrene can't be saved. But treatment is available to help prevent gangrene from getting worse. The faster you get treatment, the better your chance for recovery.
Treatment for gangrene may include one or more of the following:
Medications to treat a bacterial infection (antibiotics) are given by intravenous (IV) or taken by mouth.
Pain medications may be given to relieve discomfort.
Depending on the type of gangrene and its severity, more than one surgery may be needed. Surgery for gangrene includes:
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is done inside a chamber pressurized with pure oxygen. You usually lie on a padded table that slides into a clear plastic tube. The pressure inside the chamber will slowly rise to about 2.5 times regular atmospheric pressure.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps the blood carry more oxygen. Oxygen-rich blood slows the growth of bacteria that live in tissue lacking oxygen. It also helps infected wounds heal more easily.
A hyperbaric oxygen therapy session for gangrene usually lasts about 90 minutes. Two to three treatments a day may be needed until the infection clears.
Call your health care provider right away if you have symptoms of gangrene. Depending on the severity of your symptoms, you may be told to go to the emergency room or to call 911 or your local emergency number for medical help.
If you have time before you leave home or on the way to the hospital, use the information below to prepare for your visit.
For gangrene, some basic questions to ask your health care provider include:
Don't hesitate to ask your care provider any additional questions.
Your health care provider is likely to ask several questions to help determine the diagnosis and treatment. You may be asked:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.