Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Prenatal testing for genetic conditions can give you information about your baby's health while you're pregnant. Understand the risks and benefits.
Pregnancy can be a time of high hopes — and sometimes, worries. You might wonder if your baby is at risk of being born with a physical health condition called a birth defect. You can choose to get tests that check for things that may raise the risk of birth defects, such as genetic conditions. Depending on the results of those tests, you also may want to get tests that find out whether your baby might have a health condition at birth. Here's what you need to know about your options.
Many health concerns present at birth are due to genetic conditions. Genetic conditions are caused by changes in genes or threadlike pieces of DNA called chromosomes. The two main types of testing for genetic conditions during pregnancy are:
Prenatal screening tests for genetic conditions include:
Prenatal tests for genetic conditions are optional. It's important to make an informed decision about testing. That's especially important if you get tested for rare conditions that don't yet have treatments.
Before you go forward with testing, ask yourself these questions:
The choice of whether to get prenatal testing for genetic conditions is up to you. If you're concerned about testing, talk with your healthcare professional about the risks and benefits. You also may meet with a genetic counselor. This healthcare professional can help you choose a test and understand the results.
Taking the time to think about your options can help you make the best decision for you and your baby.

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.