Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Patterns in thoughts, feelings and behaviors can suggest when to get help for yourself or someone you care about.
Sometimes it can be hard to tell when a concern about mental health signals a need for professional help. In certain situations, the answer is clear. But in others, it isn't so obvious. For example, if you're afraid of giving a speech in public, does it mean you have a mental health condition or just a typical case of nerves? Or, when does shyness become a social phobia?
Here's help understanding how mental health conditions are identified.
Mental health is the overall wellness of how you think, behave and manage your feelings.  A mental health condition may be present when patterns or changes in thinking, feeling, or behaving cause distress or disrupt a person's ability to do daily activities.
A mental health disorder may affect how well you can:
Cultural norms and social expectations also play a role. There is no standard measure across all cultures that says when a behavior becomes a problem. What might be acceptable in one culture may be a cause for concern in another.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) is a guide published by the American Psychiatric Association that explains the signs and symptoms of several hundred mental health conditions, including anxiety, depression, eating disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder and schizophrenia. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) is a guide published by the American Psychiatric Association. It explains the symptoms of several hundred mental health conditions.  Examples of mental health conditions include anxiety, depression, eating disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder and schizophrenia.
The DSM has criteria for making a diagnosis based on symptoms. How long symptoms last and the effect they have on a person also make a difference in diagnosis. The DSM describes the typical course of a mental health condition and its risk factors. It lists other conditions that often happen with certain disorders too.
Another guideline often used to identify mental health conditions is the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) from the World Health Organization.
Health insurance companies use the coding system of the DSM and ICD when deciding on insurance coverage and benefits. They also use it to decide how much to pay mental health professionals for the care they provide.
A mental health condition may be diagnosed by a psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical social worker or other mental health professional. A primary healthcare professional also may be involved in diagnosis. Or a primary care professional may suggest a referral to a mental health professional.
Each mental health condition has its own symptoms. In general, professional help might be needed when a person has:
Many people who have mental health conditions think their symptoms are just part of life and don't need attention. Some people avoid treatment out of shame or fear. If you're concerned about your mental health, talk to a member of your healthcare team. Help is available.
Talk to your primary healthcare professional or make an appointment with a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional. If you feel it's important for your situation, look for a professional who is familiar with your culture or who understands the cultural or social context of your experiences.
With the right support, mental health conditions often can be successfully identified and treated.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.