Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Fainting occurs when the brain doesn't receive enough blood for a brief time. This causes loss of consciousness. Consciousness is usually regained quickly.
Fainting might have no medical significance. Or the cause can be a serious disorder, occasionally involving the heart. Therefore, treat loss of consciousness as a medical emergency until the symptoms are relieved and the cause is known. Talk to your health care provider if you faint more than once.
Position the person on the back. If there are no injuries and the person is breathing, raise the person's legs above heart level if possible. Prop up the person's legs about 12 inches (30 centimeters). Loosen belts, collars or other tight clothing.
To reduce the chance of fainting again, don't get the person up too fast. If the person doesn't regain consciousness within one minute, call 911 or your local emergency number.
If the person was injured in a fall associated with a faint, treat bumps, bruises or cuts appropriately. Control bleeding with direct pressure.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.