Currently, there isn't a specific test to diagnose Parkinson's disease. A diagnosis is made by a doctor trained in nervous system conditions, known as a neurologist. A diagnosis of Parkinson's is based on your medical history, a review of your symptoms, and a neurological and physical exam.
It can take time to diagnose Parkinson's disease. Healthcare professionals may recommend regular follow-up appointments with neurologists trained in movement disorders to evaluate your condition and symptoms over time and diagnose Parkinson's disease.
Your healthcare team may order some of these tests and procedures:
Alpha-synuclein test. This test, also called an alpha-synuclein seed amplification assay, detects Parkinson's disease before symptoms begin. Alpha-synuclein clumps are a hallmark sign of Parkinson's disease. Healthcare professionals can test for this condition in the skin or spinal fluid.
Alpha-synuclein is found in Lewy bodies. It forms clumps that the body can't break down. The clumps spread and damage brain cells.
In a 2023 study, researchers tested the spinal fluid of more than 1,000 people to look for clumps of the protein alpha-synuclein. The test accurately identified people with Parkinson's disease 87.7% of the time. The test also was highly sensitive for detecting people at risk of Parkinson's disease.
This study of the alpha-synuclein seed amplification assay was the largest so far. Some researchers say the study may be a breakthrough for Parkinson's disease diagnosis, research and treatment trials. But larger studies are needed.
There's hope among researchers that in the future, the test could be done using blood samples rather than spinal fluid.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Parkinson's disease-related health concerns
					Start Here


Parkinson's disease can't be cured, but medicines can help control the symptoms. Medicines often work very well. When medicine is no longer helping, some people may have surgery. Your healthcare team also may recommend aerobic exercise, physical therapy that focuses on balancing and stretching, and speech therapy.
Medicines may help improve problems with walking, movement and tremor. The medicines work by increasing or substituting for dopamine in the brain.
People with Parkinson's disease have low levels of brain dopamine. But dopamine can't be given directly because it can't enter the brain.
Your symptoms may improve significantly after you start treatment. The benefits may lessen over time, but usually medicines still control symptoms well.
Carbidopa-levodopa (Rytary, Sinemet, others). Levodopa is the most effective Parkinson's disease medicine. It is a natural chemical that passes into the brain and becomes dopamine. Levodopa is combined with carbidopa to help levodopa reach the brain and to prevent or lessens side effects such as nausea.
Side effects may include nausea and lightheadedness when you stand, called orthostatic hypotension. Higher doses of levodopa may cause involuntary movements, known as dyskinesia. If this happens, your dose may need to be lessened or adjusted.
The benefit from levodopa may lessen over time. It also may wax and wane. This is called wearing off.
Carbidopa-levodopa usually is best taken on an empty stomach if you have advanced Parkinson's disease. Follow your healthcare team's advice on the best time to take it.
Carbidopa-levodopa infusion (Duopa). This medicine is given through a feeding tube in a gel form and goes directly into the small intestine.
The tube is placed during a minor surgery. There are some risks of having the tube. The tube may fall out or cause an infection at the infusion site.
Carbidopa-levodopa infusion is for patients with advanced Parkinson's who still respond to the medicine but need a more constant level of levodopa. It helps control motor difficulties and other symptoms such as anxiety and depression.
Dopamine agonists. Unlike levodopa, dopamine agonists don't change into dopamine. Instead, they mimic dopamine effects in the brain.
They aren't as effective as levodopa in treating symptoms. But they last longer and may be used with levodopa to improve how well it works.
Side effects of dopamine agonists may include lightheadedness, nausea, hallucinations and sleepiness. The medicine also may cause involuntary movements and compulsive behaviors, such as hypersexuality, gambling, and eating.
If you're taking these medicines and behaving in ways that aren't typical for you, talk with your healthcare team.
Monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) inhibitors. These medicines include:
MAO B inhibitors help block an enzyme called monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) that breaks down brain dopamine. When selegiline is given with levodopa, it may keep levodopa from wearing off.
Side effects of MAO B inhibitors may include headaches, nausea, insomnia and confusion.
MAO B inhibitors also may cause hallucinations. When added to carbidopa-levodopa, these medicines increase the risk of hallucinations.
MAO B inhibitors usually are not used along with most antidepressants or some pain medicines because serious but rare reactions may happen. Ask your healthcare professional before taking any other medicines with an MAO B inhibitor.
Catechol O-methyltransferase, also called COMT, inhibitors. These help levodopa therapy last longer by blocking an enzyme that breaks down dopamine. They include:
Side effects of COMT inhibitors may include increased risk of involuntary movements. Side effects also may include diarrhea, nausea or vomiting.
Anticholinergics. These medicines were used for many years. They aren't used as often now because of their modest benefits and risk of side effects. They may be helpful in controlling severe tremor for some people with Parkinson's disease. They include:
Side effects of anticholinergics may include memory loss, urinary problems, confusion, blurred vision, dry mouth and constipation.
Amantadine (Gocovri). This medicine may be taken alone for short-term relief of mild, early-stage Parkinson's disease symptoms. It's mainly used with carbidopa-levodopa during advanced Parkinson's disease to help control involuntary muscle movements.
Side effects of amantadine may include mottled skin, thinking and memory problems, ankle swelling, hallucinations, and agitation.
Deep brain stimulation involves putting an electrode deep within the brain. The amount of stimulation delivered by the electrode is controlled by a device placed under the skin in the chest. A wire that travels under the skin connects the device to the electrode.
Deep brain stimulation involves putting an electrode deep within the brain. The amount of stimulation delivered by the electrode is controlled by a device placed under the skin in the chest. A wire that travels under the skin connects the device to the electrode.
Surgery for Parkinson's disease includes deep brain stimulation.
Deep brain stimulation, also called DBS, involves putting electrodes within the brain. The electrodes are connected to a pacemaker-like device that is inserted under the skin on the chest. The electrodes are connected to a generator placed in the chest near the collarbone. The generator sends electrical pulses to the brain and may reduce Parkinson's disease symptoms.
You may need follow-up appointments to adjust the settings for best results. Some people experience problems with the DBS system or have complications due to stimulation. A member of your healthcare team may need to adjust or replace some parts of the system.
DBS can be very helpful for improving severe tremor and controlling involuntary muscle movements, called dyskinesia. It is effective for controlling changing responses to levodopa or for controlling dyskinesia that doesn't improve with medicine changes.
Deep brain stimulation is most effective for people who respond to levodopa therapy. Although DBS may have long-term benefits for helping with symptoms, it does not keep Parkinson's disease from getting worse. Researchers are looking into ways to improve how well DBS works.
Side effects of deep brain stimulation may include:
MRI-guided focused ultrasound, also called MRgFUS, is a minimally invasive treatment that helps manage tremor in some people with Parkinson's disease. An MRI guides an ultrasound to the brain areas where tremor starts. The ultrasound waves are at a very high temperature and burn these areas.
Side effects of MRI-guided focused ultrasound may include:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Some lifestyle changes may help ease your Parkinson's disease symptoms. But certain medicines can make your symptoms worse. Ask your healthcare team which remedies provide the greatest symptom relief with the fewest side effects.
No foods are proved to treat Parkinson's disease, but some may help ease symptoms. For example, eating foods high in fiber and drinking plenty of fluids can help prevent constipation.
A balanced diet also provides nutrients, such as omega-3 fatty acids, that may help people with Parkinson's disease.
Exercising may improve your muscle strength, walking, flexibility and balance. It also may help decrease depression and anxiety.
Ask your healthcare professional to suggest a physical therapist who can help create an exercise program for you. Exercises that may help include walking, swimming, gardening, dancing, water aerobics and stretching.
To improve your balance and gait, try these tips:
These healthcare professionals can help with daily tasks:
Supportive therapies may help ease some of the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, such as pain, fatigue and depression. When combined with your medical treatments, they may improve your quality of life. These include:
Living with any chronic illness can be hard, and it's common to feel angry, depressed or discouraged at times. Parkinson's disease can be profoundly frustrating as walking, talking and even eating become more difficult and time-consuming.
Depression is common in people with Parkinson's disease. But antidepressant medicines can help ease the symptoms of depression. Talk with your healthcare team if you have feelings of sadness or hopelessness that don't go away.
Although friends and family can be your best allies, the understanding of people who know what you're going through can be especially helpful. Support groups aren't for everyone. However, for many people with Parkinson's disease and their families, a support group can be a good resource for practical information about Parkinson's disease.
Also, groups offer a place for you to find people who are going through similar situations and can support you.
Trying to maintain some of your usual activities may be helpful. Aim to do as many things as possible that you could do before Parkinson's disease symptoms started. Focus on the present and try to maintain a positive attitude.
To learn about support groups in your community, talk with your healthcare team, a Parkinson's disease social worker or a local public health nurse. Or contact the Parkinson's Foundation or the American Parkinson Disease Association.
You and your family also may benefit from talking with a mental health professional, such as a psychologist or social worker trained in working with people who have chronic conditions.
You're likely to first see your family healthcare professional. You may then be referred to a doctor trained in nervous system disorders, called a neurologist.
Because there's often a lot to discuss, it's a good idea to prepare for your appointment. Here's some information to help you get ready.
Your time with your care team is limited, so preparing a list of questions ahead of time can help you make the most of your time together. For Parkinson's disease, some basic questions to ask include:
In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your care team, don't hesitate to ask questions that occur to you during your appointment.
Your healthcare team is likely to ask you a several questions. Being ready to answer them may reserve time to go over any points you want to spend more time on. You may be asked:

Parkinson's disease care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Parkinson's Disease support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.