Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Plant-based proteins offer many health benefits and can be less expensive than meat. One way to get these benefits is to choose a meatless meal once or twice a week.
People decide to eat less meat for many reasons. You may want to cut out meat for health, ethical, religious, cultural or environmental reasons. But it can be hard to make changes to your diet and still serve healthy meals.
Why not start by serving meatless meals once or twice a week?
Meatless meals are built around beans, lentils, vegetables and whole grains. Plant-based proteins offer many health benefits. Eating more plant-based proteins can help your budget too. They tend to be less pricy than meat.
A plant-based diet focuses on fruits, vegetables, grains, beans, peas, lentils and nuts. It's rich in fiber, vitamins and other nutrients. And people who don't eat meat, called vegetarians, generally eat fewer calories and less fat. They also tend to weigh less. And they have a lower risk of heart disease than nonvegetarians do.
Research shows that people who eat red meat are at a higher risk of death from heart disease, stroke or diabetes. Processed meats also make the risk of death from these diseases go up.
And what you don't eat also can harm your health. Diets low in nuts, seeds, seafood, fruits and vegetables can also make your health risks go up. The good news is that even eating less red and processed meat has a positive effect on health.
Most Americans get enough protein in their diets. The recommended daily intake of protein for adults is about 50 grams.
Of course, your protein needs will vary with age, weight, health, pregnancy, activity level and other factors. Adults need about 5 to 7 ounces of protein-rich foods a day. And keep in mind, you can choose from more than one protein source.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends choosing a variety of proteins. These include eggs, low-fat milk and products made from it, beans, peas, lentils, soy products, and unsalted nuts and seeds.
If you're eating a higher calorie protein source, stick to smaller portions. For example, enjoy just 1/2 ounce of nuts, or 1 to 2 tablespoons of peanut butter.
The guidelines also suggest replacing protein foods that are higher in solid fats with choices that are lower in solid fats and calories. The fats in meat, poultry, eggs and high-fat dairy products such as cheese are called solid fats. The fats in seafood, nuts and seeds are called oils.
You don't have to get rid of all meat all at once. Instead, try easing into meatless meals. Think about going meatless one day a week. You may find you'll want to add more days.
If you don't like the idea of a whole day without meat, start with a couple of meatless dinners each week. Plan meals that use your favorite recipes that are typically meatless, such as lasagna, soup, pasta and vegetable salad. Or try substituting the following protein-rich foods for meat in your favorite recipes:
When your meals include meat, don't overeat. Choose lean cuts and stay away from oversized portions. A serving of protein is 3 ounces, about the size of a deck of cards.
An easy guide to balance your meal is to divide your plate. Proteins should take up no more than one-fourth of your plate. Vegetables and fruits should cover half your plate. Whole grains make up the rest.
The term "flexitarian" describes someone who eats mostly plant-based foods. But the person occasionally eats meat, poultry and fish.
Plant-forward is a style of eating that includes meat. But meat is not the star of the meal. This kind of healthy eating is key to the Mediterranean diet. It's also key to other cuisines, such as some Asian, Ethiopian, Indian and Middle Eastern diets. These diets limit red meat. And they focus on fruits, vegetables, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, whole grains and healthy fat. This type of diet has been shown to lower the risk of heart disease and other chronic conditions. Why not work on your flexibility and start enjoying some healthy benefits?
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.