Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Find out why newborns cry, and get tips on how to handle the tears.
All babies cry. In fact, it's typical for a newborn to cry 1 to 4 hours a day.
Your job as a caregiver is to figure out why the baby is crying. Then you can decide what, if anything, you can do to calm the baby. And don't worry about spoiling your baby with too much attention. You can't.
So react quickly when your baby is crying. There are times when you can help, and there will be times when the only thing you can do is be there for your baby. While it's hard to hear your baby's cries, don't take them as a failure of caregiving.
In time you might be able to figure out your baby's needs by the sound of the cry. For example, newborns often let out a hungry cry right after they wake up. It could quickly turn into an angry wail if they have to wait long to be fed. Also, a cry of pain might sound panicked or shrieking. Noticing patterns like these can help you respond to the cries with whatever your baby needs.
It's OK to let your baby cry if the baby doesn't seem sick and you've tried everything to soothe your baby. You can try to leave your baby alone in a safe place, such as a crib, for about 10 to 15 minutes. Many babies need to cry before they can fall asleep. And they'll nod off faster if you leave them to cry.
Some babies have frequent, long-lasting and intense crying known as colic. It often starts a few weeks after birth. But colic often gets better by the time a baby is 3 to 4 months old.
Colic can involve crying that lasts for three or more hours a day on three or more days of the week. Some experts say colic lasts at least three weeks. Colic affects healthy babies. But the crying might seem like a cry of pain, and it may begin for no clear reason. The crying often happens around the same time each day or night.
Talk to your baby's health care provider if you're concerned about colic. The provider can give the baby a checkup and suggest more soothing tips.
If your newborn cries a lot, try to keep in mind that it gets better. Babies often cry the most during the first couple of months of life. Once they're 2 to 4 months old, most babies cry less.
It's natural for the crying to make you feel tired and stressed though. Some new caregivers find that their emotions change often during the first month. Call your health care provider if you feel severely sad or if you feel sad for more than a few weeks.
While you care for your newborn, take breaks and rest when you can. Try to get enough sleep. And don't forget to do things you enjoy when you have time.
Ask your partner, other loved ones and friends for help. Let them know what support you need. You can ask the people in your life for help with things such as errands, chores, cooking and taking care of any older children you have.
Try to make a little time each day to do things that relax you. The more relaxed you are, the easier it will be to calm your baby. Infants can sense tension in adults, and they may react by crying. If you get angry or panicked, it might make your baby cry harder.
If your baby's crying causes you to feel like you are losing control, put the baby in the crib and go to another room. Take a 10- to 15-minute break to try to calm yourself down. Some things you can do to ease stress are:
No matter how angry or upset you get, never hit, shake or jerk a baby. The baby could get badly hurt or even die. Make sure other caregivers are aware of this too.
If you have trouble taking charge of your stress, reach out for help. You could call:
As a caregiver, you'll need time to get to know your baby. Don't hesitate to ask for advice and help. But trust that you can meet your baby's needs.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.