Rheumatoid arthritis can cause joint pain and swelling. As the tissue that lines the joints, called synovial membrane, becomes inflamed and gets thicker, fluid builds up. As a result, joints can bend out of shape, called deformed.
Rheumatoid arthritis can cause joint pain and swelling. As the tissue that lines the joints, called synovial membrane, becomes inflamed and gets thicker, fluid builds up. As a result, joints can bend out of shape, called deformed.
Rheumatoid arthritis is an ongoing, called chronic, condition that causes pain, swelling and irritation, called inflammation, in the joints. But it also can damage other parts of the body. These may include the skin, eyes, lungs, heart and blood vessels.
Rheumatoid arthritis happens when the immune system attacks its own body's tissues by mistake. This is called an autoimmune condition.
Rheumatoid arthritis differs from the more common osteoarthritis. Some people have both. Osteoarthritis causes damage to joints from overuse. Rheumatoid arthritis affects the lining of the joints and eats away at the bone under them. This causes a painful swelling that can cause joints to bend out of shape over time, called deformity.
The inflammation of rheumatoid arthritis also can damage other parts of the body. New medicines have improved treatment choices greatly. But rheumatoid arthritis still can cause long-term damage and increase the risk of heart disease.
Symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis may include:
Rheumatoid arthritis may affect just a few joints at first. Most often, these are the small joints of the hands and the feet.
As the disease gets worse, symptoms may spread to more joints. These most often include the wrists, elbows, hips, knees and ankles. Most of the time, symptoms affect the same joints on both sides of the body.
Many people who have rheumatoid arthritis also have symptoms that affect more than the joints. Areas that may be affected include:
Rheumatoid arthritis symptoms may vary in how bad they are. They may come and go. Periods when the condition becomes more active, called flares, follow periods of less or no swelling and pain. This is called remission.
Over time, rheumatoid arthritis can cause joints to bend out of shape and shift out of place. The joints can be hard to use for daily activities at home or at work.
Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you have ongoing pain and swelling in your joints that is not getting better after several weeks.
Vivien Williams: Pain, swelling and stiffness in your joints — all are symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. But because these symptoms come and go, the condition can sometimes be tricky to diagnose. And it's important to get the right diagnosis because starting treatment early can make a difference.
Virginia Wimmer, has rheumatoid arthritis: Give me your best shot!
Ms. Williams: At first, Virginia Wimmer blamed her painful joints on too much volleyball.
Ms. Wimmer: In my knees and in my wrists.
Ms. Williams: For a couple years, she put up with the pain and swelling that would come and go. Then things got much worse.
Ms. Wimmer: I couldn't have a ball touch my arms.
Ms. Williams: She couldn't do much of anything, let alone play outside with her daughter.
Ms. Wimmer: That was really hard. She'd have to beg me to play with her, and teach her, and help her. And I just had to sit and watch.
Ms. Williams: Virginia was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.
Nisha Manek, M.D., Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic: Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory condition. It's also associated with the immune system.
Ms. Williams: Dr. Nisha Manek says it happens when the immune system becomes deregulated. You see, the joint capsule has a lining of tissue called the synovium. The synovium makes fluid that keeps joints lubricated. When you have rheumatoid arthritis, your immune system sends antibodies to the synovium and causes inflammation. This causes pain and joint damage, especially in small joints in the fingers and wrists. But it can affect any joint.
The good news is that treatment for rheumatoid arthritis has improved dramatically over the last years. Medications, such as methotrexate, help bring the immune system back into balance and steroids can help calm flare-ups. So what was once an often crippling disease can now be controlled for many people — people like Virginia whose disease is pretty severe.
Ms. Wimmer: You can get to the point where you are doing the things that you love and that is the goal.
Ms. Williams: Dr. Manek says if you have pain, swelling and stiffness in your joints that comes and goes and is on both sides of your body, see your doctor to see if it is rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatoid is different than osteoarthritis which damages joints because of wear and tear.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Experts don't know the cause of rheumatoid arthritis. But it's a condition in which the immune system attacks healthy joint tissue by mistake, called autoimmune.
The cause is likely a mix of genetic changes and factors from outside the body, called environmental. Hormones may play a role. An infection with certain viruses may start rheumatoid arthritis in people whose genes make them more likely to get it.
Factors that may increase your risk of rheumatoid arthritis include:
Rheumatoid arthritis increases the risk of getting:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.