Symptoms of severe cholera might seem clear-cut in areas where it's common. But the only way to find out for sure if you have it is with a test of your stool.
Rapid cholera dipstick tests let healthcare professionals in remote areas quickly confirm whether someone has cholera. The speed of the test helps lower death rates at the start of cholera outbreaks. And it leads to earlier public health measures for outbreak control.
Cholera needs to be treated right away because the disease can cause death within hours. Treatments include:
Rehydration. The goal is to replace lost fluids and electrolytes using a simple rehydration solution, oral rehydration salts (ORS). The ORS solution is available as a powder that can be made with boiled or bottled water.
Without treatment, up to half of people with serious bouts of cholera could die. With treatment, deaths drop to less than 1%.
If you are in or have very recently returned from a country where cholera occurs, be aware of the symptoms. Get medical care right away if you have serious diarrhea or vomiting.
If you think you've been exposed to cholera, but your symptoms are not serious, call your family healthcare professional. Be sure to say that you think your illness may be cholera.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your checkup.
When you make your appointment, ask if there are restrictions you need to follow before your visit.
Some questions to ask your healthcare professional about cholera include:
Your healthcare professional likely will ask questions such as:
Stay well hydrated. For diarrhea and vomiting that may be cholera-related, use an oral rehydration solution.
In most developing countries, you can buy powdered packets of oral rehydration salts (ORS). These originally were developed by the World Health Organization to treat diarrhea and dehydration in infants with cholera. Stir the powder into clean drinking or boiled water according to the package directions.
If no oral rehydration solutions are available, you can make your own. Combine the following:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.