TEN causes large areas of blistering, peeling skin.
TEN causes large areas of blistering, peeling skin.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a rare, life-threatening skin reaction, usually caused by a medication. It's a severe form of Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS). In people with SJS, TEN is diagnosed when more than 30% of the skin surface is affected and the moist linings of the body (mucous membranes) have extensive damage.
TEN is a life-threatening condition that affects people of all ages. TEN is usually treated in a hospital. While the skin heals, supportive care includes controlling pain, caring for wounds and making sure you're getting enough fluids. Recovery can take weeks to months.
If your condition was caused by a medication, you'll need to permanently avoid that drug and those related to it.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis signs and symptoms include:
Early treatment is key for people with Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN). If you have symptoms, seek immediate medical attention. You'll likely need care from a skin specialist (dermatologist) and other experts in a hospital.
SJS/TEN is usually caused by a skin reaction to medicine. The symptoms are likely to start showing up one to four weeks after you start taking a new drug.
The most common drug triggers of SJS/TEN include antibiotics, epilepsy drugs, sulfa drugs and allopurinol (Aloprim, Zyloprim).
Factors that increase your risk of SJS/TEN include:
People at highest risk of TEN complications are those over age 70 and those who have liver cirrhosis or spreading (metastatic) cancer. Complications of TEN include:
To prevent another episode of TEN, learn whether it was caused by a medicine. If so, never take that medicine or anything similar again. A recurrence could be worse and life-threatening. Also tell any future health care providers about your history of TEN, and wear a medic alert bracelet or necklace with information about your condition. Or carry an allergy passport.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.