Your doctor will likely examine you for signs of illness, infection or neurological problems and ask about your headache history.
If the cause of your headaches remains uncertain, your doctor might order imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, to look for an underlying medical condition.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your chronic daily headaches-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for an underlying condition often stops frequent headaches. If no such condition is found, treatment focuses on preventing pain.
Prevention strategies vary, depending on the type of headache you have and whether medication overuse is contributing to your headaches. If you're taking pain relievers more than three days a week, the first step might be to wean yourself off these drugs with your doctor's guidance.
When you're ready to begin preventive therapy, your doctor may recommend:
Antidepressants. Tricyclic antidepressants — such as nortriptyline (Pamelor) — can be used to treat chronic headaches. These medications can also help treat the depression, anxiety and sleep disturbances that often accompany chronic daily headaches.
Other antidepressants, such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine (Prozac, Sarafem, others), might help in treating depression and anxiety, but have not been shown to be more effective than placebo for headaches.
The use of one drug is preferred, but if one drug doesn't work well enough, your doctor might consider combining drugs.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
For many people, complementary or alternative therapies offer relief from headache pain. It's important to be cautious, however. Not all complementary or alternative therapies have been studied as headache treatments, and others need further research.
Herbs, vitamins and minerals. Some evidence exists that the herbs feverfew and butterbur help prevent migraines or reduce their severity. A high dose of vitamin B-2 (riboflavin) also might reduce migraines.
Coenzyme Q10 supplements might be helpful in some individuals. And oral magnesium sulfate supplements might reduce the frequency of headaches in some people, although studies don't all agree.
Ask your doctor if these treatments are right for you. Don't use riboflavin, feverfew or butterbur if you're pregnant.
Before trying complementary or alternative therapy, discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.
Chronic daily headaches can interfere with your job, your relationships and your quality of life. Here are suggestions to help you cope with the challenges.
You're likely to start by seeing your family doctor or a general practitioner. However, you may be referred to a headache specialist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Be aware of pre-appointment restrictions. When you make the appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restrict your diet.
Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember information.
For chronic headaches, some questions to ask your doctor include:
Your doctor is likely to ask you questions, such as:
To ease your headache pain until you see your doctor, you might:

Chronic daily headaches care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Headache & Migraine support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.