Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Many herbal supplements can interact with prescription drugs. Some of these interactions can be life-threatening.
Herbal supplements are natural, so they must be safe, right? No, that's not true all the time.
Herbal supplements can strongly affect the body. Some don't work well with prescription medicines. This is called a medicine interaction. Herbal supplements can interact with medicines used to treat heart and blood vessel problems, such as high blood pressure and heart failure. Some of these medicine interactions can be risky.
About one-half of adults in the United States say they have used one or more supplements in the past 30 days. Almost 70% of older adults use them. But only about 25% of people who take herbal supplements tell their health care providers. And as many as 25% of people also take medicines ordered for them by their health care providers, also called prescription medicines.
Yet many herbal supplements may interact with heart disease medicines. For instance, many herbal supplements that are used often interact with the blood thinner warfarin (Jantoven).
That's why you need to talk with your health care provider before you take herbal supplements if you take prescription medicines. Your health care provider and pharmacist can help you stay away from unsafe interactions.
Many common herbal supplements interact with common heart medicines. This list covers only some interactions. Be sure to talk to your health care provider before you take any herbal supplements if you take prescription medicines.
Danshen can interact strongly with some heart medicines, such as:
Evening primrose may raise your risk of bleeding if you also take a blood thinner, such as:
Garlic may raise your risk of bleeding if you also take a blood thinner, such as:
Ginkgo biloba may raise your risk of bleeding if you also take a blood thinner, such as:
If you take ginseng with warfarin, it may lessen how well warfarin works.
The herb licorice may lower warfarin levels and can add to digoxin's effects.
Saw palmetto might make your risk of bleeding higher if you also take a blood thinner, such as:
It's not suggested to take St. John's wort if you take blood thinners. It also may keep some medicines from working as well as they should, such as:
If your health care provider tells you it's OK to use an herbal supplement along with medicine, be careful. Follow directions about how much medicine to take. Watch for any symptoms that you may be having a drug interaction, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.