The birth control patch is a contraceptive device that contains the hormones estrogen and progestin. The small patch, worn on the skin, releases hormones into your bloodstream that thicken cervical mucus and suppress ovulation.
The birth control patch is a contraceptive device that contains the hormones estrogen and progestin. The small patch, worn on the skin, releases hormones into your bloodstream that thicken cervical mucus and suppress ovulation.
The birth control patch is a type of contraception that contains the hormones estrogen and progestin. You wear the patch to avoid becoming pregnant.
Once a week for three weeks, you place a small patch on your skin, so that you wear a patch for a total of 21 days. During the fourth week, you don't wear a patch — which allows menstrual bleeding to occur.
The birth control patch works similarly to combination birth control pills. The birth control patch prevents pregnancy by releasing hormones into your bloodstream that keep your ovaries from releasing an egg (ovulation). The birth control patch also thickens cervical mucus to keep sperm from reaching an egg.
You'll need a prescription from your health care provider to use the birth control patch. The patch doesn't protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
The birth control patch is used to prevent pregnancy. The birth control patch has some advantages over other types of birth control:
The birth control patch isn't appropriate for everyone, however. Your health care provider may advise against the patch if you:
In addition, tell your health care provider if you:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more.  Click to view a preview and subscribe below.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
With perfect use, pregnancy happens in less than 1 out of 100 women during the first year of using of the birth control patch. Pregnancy rates are estimated to be 7 to 9 out of 100 women during a year of typical use. Typical use situations might include forgetting to change the patch on time or discovering that the patch came loose from your skin for a prolonged time.
The birth control patch doesn't protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
Side effects of the birth control patch may include:
Some research shows that the birth control patch may increase estrogen levels in the body compared with combination birth control pills that are taken by mouth. This may mean there's a slightly higher risk of estrogen-related adverse events, such as blood clots, in patch users than in people who take combination birth control pills.
You'll need to request a prescription for the birth control patch from your health care provider. Your health care provider will review your medical history and check your blood pressure. Talk to your health care provider about any medications you're taking, including nonprescription and herbal products.
Consult your health care provider as soon as possible if you have:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.