Endoscopic procedures with tissue biopsy are the only way to definitively diagnose ulcerative colitis. Other types of tests can help rule out complications or other forms of inflammatory bowel disease, such as Crohn's disease.
To help confirm a diagnosis of ulcerative colitis, one or more of the following tests and procedures may be recommended:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your ulcerative colitis-related health concerns
					Start Here


Ulcerative colitis treatment usually involves either drug therapy or surgery.
Several categories of medicines may be effective in treating ulcerative colitis. The type you take depends on the severity of your condition. The medicines that work well for some people may not work for others, so it may take time to find a medicine that helps you.
In addition, because some medicines have serious side effects, you need to weigh the benefits and risks of any treatment.
Anti-inflammatory medicines are often the first step in the treatment of ulcerative colitis and are appropriate for many people with this condition. These medicines include:
These medicines also reduce inflammation, but they do so by suppressing the immune system response that starts the process of inflammation. For some people, a combination of these medicines works better than one medicine alone.
This class of therapies targets proteins made by the immune system. Types of biologics used to treat ulcerative colitis include:
More recently, orally delivered agents also known as "small molecules" have become available for ulcerative colitis treatment. Types of small molecule medicines include:
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently issued a warning about tofacitinib, stating that preliminary studies show an increased risk of serious heart-related problems and cancer from taking this medicine. If you're taking tofacitinib for ulcerative colitis, don't stop taking the medicine without first talking with a healthcare professional.
You may need additional medicines to manage specific symptoms of ulcerative colitis. Always talk with your healthcare team before using nonprescription medicines. One or more of the following medicines may be recommended:
Surgery can eliminate ulcerative colitis and involves removing your entire colon and rectum. This procedure is called a proctocolectomy.
In most cases, proctocolectomy involves another procedure called ileoanal anastomosis (J-pouch) surgery. A J-pouch eliminates the need to wear a bag to collect stool. The surgeon constructs a pouch from the end of the small intestine. The pouch is then attached directly to the anus, allowing for a relatively typical way to expel waste.
In some cases, a pouch is not possible. Instead, surgeons create a permanent opening in the belly, called an ileal stoma, through which stool is passed for collection in an attached bag.
In another type of procedure known as a continent ileostomy, also called a Koch pouch, the surgeon creates an ileal stoma opening in the belly, then places a one-way valve in the opening. A continent ileostomy does not collect stool in a bag. Instead, a tube is placed into the valve when stool needs to be emptied. This allows for control over the timing of bowel elimination.
You will likely need more-frequent screening for colon cancer because of your increased risk. The recommended schedule will depend on the location of your disease and how long you have had it. People with proctitis are not at increased risk of colon cancer.
If your disease involves more than your rectum, you will require a surveillance colonoscopy every 1 to 2 years, beginning as soon as eight years after diagnosis. The frequency depends on how much inflammation there is and how much of the colon is involved.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Sometimes you may feel helpless when facing ulcerative colitis. But changes in your diet and lifestyle may help control your symptoms and lengthen the time between flare-ups.
There's no firm evidence that what you eat actually causes inflammatory bowel disease. But certain foods and beverages can worsen your symptoms, especially during a flare-up.
It can be helpful to keep a food diary to keep track of what you're eating, as well as how you feel. If you discover that some foods are causing your symptoms to flare, you can try removing them from your diet.
Here are some general dietary suggestions that may help you manage your condition:
Although stress doesn't cause inflammatory bowel disease, it can make your symptoms worse and may trigger flare-ups.
Many people with digestive disorders have used some form of complementary and alternative medicine. However, there are few well-designed studies showing the safety and effectiveness of complementary and alternative medicine.
Although research is limited, there is some evidence that adding probiotics along with other medicines may be helpful, but this has not been proved.
Symptoms of ulcerative colitis may first prompt you to visit your primary healthcare professional. Your healthcare professional may recommend that you see a specialist who treats digestive diseases, called a gastroenterologist.
Because appointments can be brief, and there's often a lot of information to discuss, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your appointment.
Your time with your healthcare professional is limited, so preparing a list of questions ahead of time can help you make the most of your time. List your questions from most important to least important in case time runs out. For ulcerative colitis, some basic questions to ask your health professional include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you some questions. Being ready to answer them may reserve time to go over points you want to spend more time on. Your healthcare professional may ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.