Your healthcare team asks about your or your child's medical history, including general health and past illnesses. A physical exam is done.
After that, the healthcare team might recommend tests. These tests are based on the type of muscular dystrophy suspected. They may include the following:
No cure exists for any type of muscular dystrophy. But treatment for some types of the disease can help people:
Treatments for some types of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, in particular, are quickly expanding based on research.
People with muscular dystrophy often need to be monitored throughout life by a team of healthcare professionals. A primary care doctor often helps oversee your overall medical care. Most often, the care team includes:
Many people with muscular dystrophy also might need other doctors, including a:
Many people with muscular dystrophy also might need to see other specialists, such as a:
Muscular dystrophy treatment includes medicines, physical and occupational therapy, equipment, surgery, and other procedures. Ongoing tests of walking, swallowing, breathing and hand function help the treatment team change treatments as needed over time. 
Your healthcare team might recommend medicines such as:
Ask your healthcare professional what your treatment choices are. Approved targeted treatments may vary by country.
Various therapy and assistive devices can improve the quality of life in people with muscular dystrophy. They may help some people live longer too. Examples include:
Surgery might be needed to fix contractures or a curve in the spine that could make breathing harder over time. Heart health may be improved with a pacemaker or other heart device.
Illnesses that affect the muscles involved in breathing can become a problem with muscular dystrophy. So, it's key to be vaccinated for pneumonia. Also, keep up to date with shots that protect against the flu and COVID-19. Try to stay away from people who are sick.
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Learning that you or a loved one has muscular dystrophy can be very challenging. To help cope, find someone to talk with. You might feel comfortable sharing your feelings with a friend or family member. Or you might prefer meeting with a formal support group.
If your child has muscular dystrophy, ask your healthcare professional about ways to explain the condition to your child.
You might be referred to a doctor who's received extra training to find and treat muscular dystrophy.
Feel free to ask other questions during your visit.
Your doctor or another healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.