Peanut allergy is a condition that causes the body's germ-fighting immune system to react to peanuts. It's one of the most common causes of a life-threatening allergic reaction to food. This life-threatening reaction is known as anaphylaxis.
Peanut allergy has been increasing in children. Even if you or your child has shown only a mild reaction to peanuts, it's important to talk to a healthcare professional. There is still a risk of a more serious future reaction.
An allergic response to peanuts usually occurs within minutes after exposure. Peanut allergy signs and symptoms can include:
Peanut allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis due to food. This medical emergency requires treatment with an epinephrine autoinjector (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others) and a trip to the emergency room. Epinephrine is also called adrenaline.
Anaphylaxis signs and symptoms can include:
Talk to your care team if you have had any signs or symptoms of peanut allergy. Seek emergency treatment if you have a severe reaction to peanuts.
Call, or have someone else call 911 or your local emergency number if you have any signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis such as:
Peanut allergy occurs when the immune system flags peanut proteins as harmful. When exposed to peanuts, the immune system releases symptom-causing chemicals into the bloodstream. These chemicals cause an allergic reaction.
Direct and cross-contact with peanuts could cause a reaction:
It isn't clear why some people develop allergies while others don't. However, people with certain risk factors have a greater chance of developing peanut allergy.
Complications of peanut allergy can include anaphylaxis. Children and adults who have a severe peanut allergy are especially at risk of having this life-threatening reaction.
Studies have shown a strong link between early peanut exposure and lower food allergy risk. In the studies, peanuts were introduced to high-risk babies and children from 4 months to 3 years old. By doing so, their food allergy risk was reduced up to 80%. Children at risk of peanut allergy include those with mild to severe eczema, egg allergy, or both. Before introducing your child to peanuts, discuss the best approach with your child's healthcare professional.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.