No single test can confirm a diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis. But some types of tests can rule out other causes of joint pain, such as rheumatoid arthritis or gout.
No cure exists for psoriatic arthritis. Treatment focuses on controlling inflammation in your affected joints to prevent joint pain and disability and controlling skin involvement. One of the most common treatments are prescription medications called disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
Treatment will depend on how severe your disease is and what joints are affected. You might have to try different treatments before you find one that brings you relief.
Drugs used to treat psoriatic arthritis include:
Conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). These drugs can slow the progression of psoriatic arthritis and save joints and other tissues from permanent damage.
The most commonly used disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) is methotrexate (Trexall, Otrexup, others). Others include leflunomide (Arava) and sulfasalazine (Azulfidine). Side effects can include liver damage, bone marrow suppression, and lung inflammation and scarring (fibrosis).
Physical and occupational therapies might ease pain and make it easier to do everyday tasks. Ask your doctor for referrals. Massage therapy might also offer relief.
The support of friends and family can make a tremendous difference when you're facing the challenges of psoriatic arthritis. For some people, support groups can offer the same benefits. A counselor or therapist can help you devise coping strategies to reduce your stress levels.
You're likely to first discuss your signs and symptoms with your family doctor. He or she may refer you to a doctor specializing in the treatment of arthritis and related disorders (rheumatologist).
If possible, bring a friend or a family member with you to your appointment to help you remember the information you get.
Basic questions about psoriatic arthritis might include:
Don't hesitate to ask other questions you have.
Your doctor might ask some of the following questions:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.