There's no single test for frontotemporal dementia. Healthcare professionals consider your symptoms and exclude other possible causes of your symptoms. FTD can be hard to diagnose early because symptoms of frontotemporal dementia often overlap with those of other conditions. Healthcare professionals may order the following tests.
To help rule out other conditions, such as liver or kidney disease, you may need blood tests.
Some symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea can be similar to those of frontotemporal dementia. These symptoms can include changes in memory, thinking and behavior. You may need a sleep study if you experience loud snoring and pauses in breathing while you sleep. A sleep study can help rule out obstructive sleep apnea as a cause of your symptoms.
Healthcare professionals may test your reasoning and memory skills. This type of testing is especially helpful to learn which type of dementia you may have at an early stage. It also can help distinguish FTD from other causes of dementia.
Images of the brain can reveal visible conditions that may be causing symptoms. These may include clots, bleeding or tumors.
There's hope that diagnosing frontotemporal dementia may become easier in the future. Researchers are studying potential biomarkers of FTD. Biomarkers are substances that can be measured to help diagnose a disease.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your frontotemporal dementia-related health concerns
					Start Here



                Join thousands of readers who trust Mayo Clinic Health Letter for reliable health tips and insights. Start your journey to better health today.
            
There's currently no cure or treatment for frontotemporal dementia, although research into treatments is ongoing. Medicines used to treat or slow Alzheimer's disease don't seem to be helpful for people with frontotemporal dementia. Some Alzheimer's medicines may worsen the FTD symptoms. But certain medicines and speech therapy can help manage your symptoms.
These medicines may help manage behavioral symptoms of frontotemporal dementia.
People with frontotemporal dementia who have trouble with language may benefit from speech therapy. Speech therapy teaches people to use communication aids.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
As frontotemporal dementia symptoms get worse, you'll need the help of caregivers. Caregivers can help you with daily activities, help maintain your safety, provide transportation and help with finances. Your healthcare professional can tell you when you may need to stop driving or let someone you trust take over your finances.
It's also important to get regular cardiovascular exercise. It may help improve your mood and thinking skills.
At home, it may be helpful to make adjustments so that daily living tasks are easier and you reduce the chance of injuries. For example, remove rugs to reduce falls. Or raise toilets to make it easier to use the bathroom.
Caregivers may be able to address behavioral symptoms by changing the way they interact with people with dementia. Ask your loved one's healthcare professional about resources that provide training in caring for someone with dementia.
Keeping a log of behavioral symptoms may help you pinpoint things in the environment that trigger symptoms. Taking these steps also may help:
If you've been diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia, receiving support, care and compassion from people you trust can be invaluable.
Through your healthcare professional or the internet, find a support group for people with frontotemporal dementia. A support group can provide information tailored for your needs. It also allows you to share your experiences and feelings.
Caring for someone with frontotemporal dementia can be challenging because FTD can cause extreme personality changes and behavioral symptoms. It may be helpful to educate others about behavioral symptoms and what they can expect when spending time with your loved one.
Caregivers and the spouses, partners or other relatives who care for people with dementia, known as care partners, need assistance. They might find help from family members, friends and support groups. Or they may use respite care provided by adult care centers or home health care agencies.
It's important for caregivers and care partners to take care of their health, exercise, eat a healthy diet and manage their stress. Participating in hobbies outside the home may help ease some stress.
When a person with frontotemporal dementia requires 24-hour care, most families turn to nursing homes. Plans made ahead of time will make this transition easier and may allow the person to be involved in the decision-making process.
People with frontotemporal dementia often don't recognize that they have symptoms. Family members usually notice changes and arrange for an appointment with a healthcare professional.
Your healthcare professional may refer you to a doctor trained in nervous system conditions, known as a neurologist. Or you may be referred to a doctor trained in mental health conditions, known as a psychologist.
You may not be aware of all your symptoms, so it's a good idea to take a family member or close friend along with you to your appointment. You also may want to take a written list that includes:
In addition to a physical exam, your healthcare professional checks your neurological health. This is done by testing things such as your balance, muscle tone and strength. You also may have a brief mental status evaluation to check your memory and thinking skills.

Frontotemporal dementia care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.