Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Parenting, Kids & Teens / Healthy school lunch ideas for kids and teens
Step aside, breakfast. For school-aged children, there’s a good deal of evidence that lunch takes the top spot as the most important meal of the day.
Lunch is a vital source of energy and nutrients crucial for kids’ growth, development and academic performance. It’s the meal that replenishes kids after rushing out the door with too little — or no — breakfast. It refuels them after hours of complex mental demands from advanced learning and social interaction. And it powers the next several hours of mental and physical activity.
That’s why it’s important to provide a balanced lunch made up of a diverse array of essential food groups — such as complex carbohydrates, proteins, healthy fats, fruits and vegetables. Kids need a good lunch to fuel their bodies and minds throughout the school day — and promote health for years to come.
But as every busy parent knows, it’s often easier to rely on cafeteria meals or prepackaged, processed foods than to make a nutritious homemade lunch. A cafeteria meal is not the end of the world, but meals made at home can be healthier (and in some cases, cheaper) than school-provided options.
Getting your kid involved and streamlining the packing process can go a long way to making lunch-packing a simpler, more enjoyable journey. And if you’ve run out of lunch ideas, there’s plenty of ideas and inspiration below.
Being a caregiver to a kid comes with a million concerns, and lunch may be a low priority. But take a moment to consider how a healthy lunch can benefit your kid. For many kids, lunch provides roughly a third of daily calories that help to power through a busy, active day. And these calories can do more than energize. They also can:
By consistently providing nutritious packed lunches, parents and caregivers contribute significantly to the overall health and well-being of children and teens.
Packing a lunch can be a burdensome chore for busy families. Planning and preparation is key to making it a fast, fun task. Try to:
While it may be faster and simpler to make the lunches yourself, it’s worth trying to collaborate with your kid. Ask your child about their lunchtime. How much time do they have to eat? When do they eat during the day? What are their favorite lunch foods? What kinds of colors, ingredients and shapes do they like?
Lay some guidelines about what needs to be included in a balanced meal, like a serving of fruit. Then, let your kids get involved. Kids can:
Ideally, involving children in the process of selecting and preparing their lunch can be a positive bonding experience, and can create open communication about food preferences, encourage exploration of new foods, and foster a sense of responsibility and ownership. It also can serve as an opportune moment to have meaningful and open conversations about food and nutrition.
Young children can’t be fully responsible for their own lunch, but including them in lunch making can bring big wins in trying nutritious foods, creating a positive food relationship and improving child-caregiver bonding. Focus on color, fun and simplicity.
Looking for ideas for a packed lunch? Try:
While the goal is a satisfying, nutrient-rich meal, remember that the nutrients only work if your kid eats them! Making a lunch that uses colorful containers, fun themes and even a simple star cookie cutter for sandwiches can go a long way in getting kids excited about lunch and enticing them to actually eat their food.
Like it or not, teens are more in control of what they eat. Help them create better meals without too much oversight by having nutritious ingredients stocked and accessible. And again, the lunch will only be beneficial if your kid eats it; put the lunch on the counter or in their bag to ensure it isn’t left behind.
While older children can take more responsibility for themselves, they still need guidance and role modeling from caregivers. Packing a healthy lunch for yourself is one of the best ways to ensure your kid will.
For older kids and teens, try these lunch ideas.
It’s important to focus on the main meals for the bulk of satiety and nutrition. But children have small stomachs and high energy demands; making a snack between meals is often essential to keep energy levels high and hunger levels low.
When packing snacks, try to make sure the snack complements the main meal, is shelf-stable, can be quickly consumed and offers a combination of nutrients. Good examples include:
When Javi learns that his favorite cousin is coming to visit, he can’t contain his excitement. Being excited can be fun. The energy! The anticipation! But, excitement is still a feeling that needs to be managed. Luckily for kids, they have everything they need to manage their enthusiasm in all…
Discover more Parenting, Kids & Teens content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
Want more children’s health and parenting information? Sign up for free to our email list.
Children’s health information and parenting tips to your inbox.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing.

      Lori Russell, M.S., RDN, LD, is an outpatient pediatric dietitian and gastroenterology specialist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. She has specialized in endurance sports nutrition and functional wellness and now focuses her energy on improving the health of children through nutrition.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.