A chronic cough is a cough that lasts eight weeks or longer in adults, or four weeks in children. A chronic cough is more than just annoying. It can interrupt your sleep and leave you feeling very tired. Severe cases of chronic cough can cause vomiting and lightheadedness, and even break a rib.
The most common causes are tobacco use and asthma. Other common causes include fluid that drips from the nose down the back of the throat, called postnasal drip, and the backward flow of stomach acid into the tube that connects the throat to the stomach, called acid reflux. Fortunately, chronic cough usually goes away once the underlying issue is treated.
A chronic cough can occur with other symptoms, including:
See your healthcare professional if you have a cough that lasts for weeks, especially one that brings up sputum or blood, disturbs your sleep, or affects school or work.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
A cough that happens once in a while is common. It helps clear irritants and mucus from your lungs and prevents infection. But a cough that lasts for weeks is usually due to a health concern. Many times, more than one health concern causes the cough.
Most cases of chronic cough are due to these causes, which can occur alone or together:
Less commonly, chronic cough may be caused by:
Being a current or former smoker is one of the leading risk factors for chronic cough. Exposure to a lot of secondhand smoke also can lead to coughing and lung damage.
Having a cough that doesn't stop can be very tiring. Coughing can cause various concerns, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.