Plan B One-Step is a type of morning-after pill that can be used after unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy. Plan B One-Step contains the hormone levonorgestrel. It usually stops or delays the ovary from releasing an egg, also called ovulation.
Plan B One-Step is a type of morning-after pill that can be used after unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy. Plan B One-Step contains the hormone levonorgestrel. It usually stops or delays the ovary from releasing an egg, also called ovulation.
The morning-after pill is a type of emergency birth control, also called emergency contraception. It can help prevent pregnancy after sex if your regular birth control method didn't work or wasn't used.
The morning-after pill isn't meant to be a couple's main method of birth control. It's a backup option. Most morning-after pills contain one of two types of medicine: levonorgestrel (Plan B One-Step, Fallback Solo, others) or ulipristal acetate (ella, Logilia).
Levonorgestrel is sold without a prescription. Ulipristal acetate is available only with a prescription.
The morning-after pill can help prevent pregnancy in people who:
Morning-after pills work mainly by delaying or preventing the release of an egg from the ovaries, called ovulation. They do not end a pregnancy that has already started. Different medicines are used to end an early pregnancy in a treatment called a medical abortion. Medicines used in a medical abortion can include mifepristone (Mifeprex, Korlym) and misoprostol (Cytotec).
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Emergency birth control is an effective way to prevent pregnancy after sex without protection. But it doesn't work as well as other types of birth control. And emergency contraception isn't meant for routine use. Also, the morning-after pill might not work even if you use it correctly. And it doesn't protect you from sexually transmitted infections.
The morning-after pill isn't right for everyone. Don't take a morning-after pill if:
If you're overweight or obese, the morning-after pill might not work as well as it would for people who aren't overweight.
Also, make sure you're not pregnant before using ulipristal. The effects of ulipristal on a developing baby aren't known. If you're breastfeeding, do not take ulipristal.
Side effects of the morning-after pill often last only a few days. They can include:
For the morning-after pill to work best, take it as soon as possible after sex without protection. You need to use it within five days, or 120 hours, for it to work. You can take emergency birth control pills anytime during your menstrual cycle.
Using the morning-after pill may delay your period by up to one week. If you don't get your period within three weeks of taking the morning-after pill, take a pregnancy test.
Most often, you don't need to contact your healthcare professional after using the morning-after pill. But you should call your healthcare professional if you have any of the following symptoms:
These can be symptoms of a miscarriage. These also can be symptoms of a pregnancy that forms outside the uterus, called an ectopic pregnancy. Without treatment, an ectopic pregnancy can be life-threatening for someone who's pregnant.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.