Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
First aid for chest pain depends on the cause. Serious health conditions such as a heart attack can cause chest pain. Other causes of chest pain include infections and bruised chest muscles. If you have new or sudden chest pain, get emergency medical help.
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have sudden severe chest pain or any unexplained chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes.
Also get emergency medical help if you have:
These symptoms can be caused by many different health conditions. Other symptoms not listed also may need emergency help. So it's important to get a quick diagnosis. If you feel like you can't breathe well or are having a heart attack, get medical help immediately.
Symptoms of chest pain depend on the cause. Common examples include:
A heart attack generally causes chest pain for more than 15 minutes. The pain may be mild or severe. Some heart attacks happen suddenly. But sometimes warning symptoms happen hours or days in advance.
In women, chest pain is not always severe or even the most noticeable symptom. Women tend to have more-vague symptoms, such as nausea or back or jaw pain. These symptoms may be more intense than the chest pain.
If you or someone else may be having a heart attack, follow these first-aid steps:
Angina is chest pain or discomfort caused by reduced blood flow to the heart. The chest pain may feel like:
Stable angina symptoms usually last five minutes or less. The symptoms usually go away with rest or medicine. If the angina pain doesn't go away with rest or medicine, get emergency medical help.
Pneumonia is an infection of the air sacs in the lungs. Pleurisy is swelling and irritation of the tissues that surround the lung. Symptoms include:
Unlike a true heart attack, pleurisy pain usually goes away temporarily by holding your breath or by pressing on the painful area of your chest.
Pericarditis is swelling and irritation of the thin, saclike tissue surrounding your heart. The main symptom is sharp chest pain that gets worse when you cough, lie down or take a deep breath.
Chest wall pain is a type of muscle pain. Bruised chest muscles may happen from a lot of coughing, straining or a minor injury. One type of chest wall pain is costochondritis. Symptoms include pain and tenderness in and around the area that connects the ribs to the breastbone.
If gently touching the area with your fingers causes chest pain, it's unlikely that a serious condition, such as a heart attack, is the cause.
This article does not include all possible causes of chest pain. Talk to your healthcare professional if you are concerned about chest pain. If you think you're having a heart attack, get emergency medical help.
Treatment depends on the specific cause of the chest pain. Some causes of chest pain, such as a heart attack, need emergency treatment. Chest pain symptoms from other causes, such as pericarditis, may go away without treatment.
Chest pain is a common reason that people seek medical treatment. It can be difficult to tell if chest pain is due to a heart attack or other health condition, especially if you've never had chest pain before. Don't try to diagnose the cause yourself.
Call your healthcare professional if you have new or unexplained chest pain. If you think you're having a heart attack, call 911 or your local emergency number.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.