Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Some people claim that coconut oil can help with many health conditions. That includes underactive thyroid, also called hypothyroidism. But there's no high-quality research to support the claim that coconut oil can cure hypothyroidism.
If you have symptoms of hypothyroidism, talk to your healthcare professional. Examples of hypothyroidism symptoms include more sensitivity to cold than usual, often being very tired, dry skin, constipation and memory problems. Blood tests can show if the thyroid isn't working properly.
If you have hypothyroidism, effective treatment is available. Treatment for hypothyroidism usually involves taking the thyroid hormone medicine levothyroxine (Levo-T, Synthroid, others) every day. This medicine is taken by mouth. It returns hormone levels to a healthy range. That makes the symptoms of hypothyroidism go away.
If you've already been diagnosed with an underactive thyroid, follow your healthcare professional's directions for taking thyroid hormone medicine. If you take thyroid hormone medicine and you still have symptoms, tell your healthcare professional. The dose of your medicine may need to be changed.
Although there's no cure for an underactive thyroid, its symptoms often can be successfully controlled.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.