Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Ready to start a fitness program? Measure your fitness level with a few simple tests. Then use the results to set fitness goals and track your progress.
You might have some idea of how fit you are. But knowing for sure can help you set good fitness goals, see your progress and stay motivated. Once you know your starting point, you can plan where you want to go. Get started with the simple tests below.
Most often, measures of fitness involve these key areas:
You'll also need a pencil or pen and paper to record your scores as you finish each part of the test. You can record your scores in a notebook or journal. Or you can save them in a spreadsheet or another electronic format.
To check your pulse over your carotid artery, place your index and third fingers on your neck to the side of your windpipe. When you feel your pulse, look at your watch and count the number of beats in 15 seconds. Multiply this number by four to get your heart rate per minute.
To check your pulse over your carotid artery, place your index and third fingers on your neck to the side of your windpipe. When you feel your pulse, look at your watch and count the number of beats in 15 seconds. Multiply this number by four to get your heart rate per minute.
Your heart rate at rest is a measure of heart health and fitness. For most adults, a healthy heart rate is between 60 to 100 beats per minute.
To check your pulse at the blood vessel in the neck called the carotid artery, place your index and third fingers on your neck to the side of your windpipe.
To check your pulse at your wrist, place two fingers between the bone and the tendon over the blood vessel found on the thumb side of the wrist, called the radial artery.
Take your pulse for 15 seconds. Multiply this number by four to find out your beats per minute. Let's say you count 20 beats in 15 seconds. Multiply 20 by four for a total of 80 beats per minute.
The target heart rate zone is a heart rate range that gives your heart and lungs a good workout. This zone ranges from 50% to 85% of the maximum heart rate (MHR) for your age. Aim for 50% to 70% of MHR when you do moderately intense activities and 70% to 85% of MHR when you do vigorous activities.
You can use the target heart rate zone as a guide to see how hard you're exercising. It's okay if you don't reach your target zone. Any activity is good for your health. If you're on the lower end of your target heart rate zone, you can try to increase your effort little by little to get more from your workout.
If you exercise regularly, you can stop briefly to check your heart rate at times during an aerobic workout. If you don't exercise regularly, you can do a simple test by checking your heart rate after a brisk 10-minute walk.
Another way to test your aerobic fitness is to time yourself on a 1.5-mile (2.4-kilometer) run or jog. The following times show a good fitness level based on age and sex. A lower time most often means better aerobic fitness. A higher time suggests a need to do better.
Pushups can help you measure how strong your muscles are.
Pushups can help you measure how strong your muscles are.
Pushups can help you measure muscular strength and endurance. If you're starting a fitness program, you can do pushups on your knees. If you can, do classic pushups. Follow these steps for both types:
The following counts show a good fitness level based on age and sex. If your pushup count is below the target number, use the target as a goal to work toward. Counts above the targets mean better fitness. 
If the size of your waist, called the circumference, is greater than your hips, you carry more weight above the hips. This means you have a higher risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes.
The risk is even greater for women with waist sizes of 35 inches (89 centimeters) or more. For men, the risk is higher with waist sizes of 40 inches (102 centimeters) or more.
With a cloth measuring tape, measure your waist just above the hipbones.
Your body mass index (BMI) shows whether you have a healthy amount of body fat.  You can find your BMI with a BMI table or online calculator.
To do the math yourself, divide your weight in pounds by your height in inches squared. Then multiply by 703. Or divide your weight in kilograms by your height in meters squared. To get your height in meters, divide your height in centimeters by 100.
The following shows what your BMI results mean.
The results of these fitness tests can help you set goals for staying active and getting more fit. For most healthy adults, the Department of Health and Human Services recommends these exercise guidelines:
Keep track of your progress in building fitness. Take the same measurements about six weeks after you begin an exercise program. Then take them once in a while.
Each time you repeat your tests, take pride in your progress. Then increase your fitness goals. Share your results with your healthcare professional or personal trainer for more guidance.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.