Dizziness is a term that people use to describe a range of sensations, such as feeling faint, woozy, weak or wobbly. The sense that you or your surroundings are spinning or moving is more precisely termed vertigo.
Dizziness is one of the more common reasons adults see a healthcare professional. Frequent dizzy spells or constant dizziness can have serious effects on your life. But dizziness rarely means that you have a life-threatening condition.
Treatment of dizziness depends on the cause and your symptoms. Treatment often helps, but the symptoms may come back.
People who have bouts of dizziness may describe symptoms such as:
These feelings may be triggered or made worse by walking, standing up or moving your head. Your dizziness may happen along with an upset stomach. Or your dizziness may be so sudden or severe that you need to sit or lie down. The bout may last seconds or days, and it may come back.
In general, see your healthcare professional if you have any repeated, sudden, severe, or long-lasting dizziness or vertigo with no clear cause.
Get emergency medical care if you have new, severe dizziness or vertigo along with any of the following:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Loop-shaped canals in the inner ear contain fluid and fine, hairlike sensors that help with keeping balance. At the base of the canals are the utricle and saccule, each containing a patch of sensory hair cells. Within these cells are tiny particles called otoconia that help monitor the position of the head in relation to gravity and linear motion, such as going up and down in an elevator or moving forward and backward in a car.

Loop-shaped canals in the inner ear contain fluid and fine, hairlike sensors that help with keeping balance. At the base of the canals are the utricle and saccule, each containing a patch of sensory hair cells. Within these cells are tiny particles called otoconia that help monitor the position of the head in relation to gravity and linear motion, such as going up and down in an elevator or moving forward and backward in a car.
Dizziness has many possible causes. These include conditions that affect the inner ear, motion sickness and medicine side effects. Very rarely, dizziness may be caused by a condition such as poor circulation, infection or injury.
The way dizziness makes you feel and the things that trigger it for you provide clues about possible causes. How long the dizziness lasts and any other symptoms that you have also can help healthcare professionals pinpoint the cause.
Your sense of balance depends on the combined input from the various parts of your sensory system. These include your:
Vertigo is the sense that your surroundings are spinning or moving. With inner ear conditions, your brain receives signals from the inner ear that don't match what your eyes and sensory nerves are receiving. Vertigo is what results as your brain works to sort out the confusion.
You may feel dizzy, faint or off balance if too little blood reaches your brain. Causes include:
Dizziness may result from conditions or circumstances like these:
Factors that may raise your risk of getting dizzy include:
Dizziness can lead to other health concerns called complications. For instance, it can raise your risk of falling and hurting yourself. Getting dizzy while driving a car or running heavy machinery can make an accident more likely. You also may have long-term complications if you don't get treatment for a health condition that may be causing your dizziness.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.