Hidradenitis suppurativa can be mistaken for pimples or acne. For many people, it takes years to receive a correct diagnosis.
Your health care provider will base a diagnosis on your signs and symptoms, skin appearance, and medical history. You might be referred to a health care provider who specializes in skin conditions, also known as a dermatologist. Hidradenitis suppurativa can be difficult to diagnose and requires specialized care.
No laboratory test is available to diagnose hidradenitis suppurativa. But if pus or drainage is present, your health care provider might take a sample for lab testing.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your hidradenitis suppurativa-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment with medicines, surgery or both can help control symptoms and prevent complications of hidradenitis suppurativa. Talk with your health care provider about the risks and benefits of the treatment options and how to develop an approach that's right for you.
Expect to have regular follow-up visits with your dermatologist. Some people might need the comprehensive care provided by a health care team with members from multiple medical specialties.
Your health care provider might prescribe one or more of these types of medicines:
Combined medical and surgical approaches help manage hidradenitis suppurativa. Surgery is an important part of disease management when a tunnel, and bump, or abscess, are present. Which surgical approach is right for you depends on the extent and severity of your condition. Talk with your health care provider about the risks and benefits of the options, including:

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Mild hidradenitis suppurativa can sometimes be effectively controlled with self-care measures. Self-care is also an important complement to medical treatment.
These suggestions might relieve discomfort, speed healing or prevent flare-ups:
Hidradenitis suppurativa can be a challenge to your emotional health and well-being. Painful sores might affect your sleep, ability to move or sex life. Or the sores might drain pus with an odor, which might make you feel anxious, embarrassed, angry, self-conscious or depressed. The ongoing, persistent nature of the disease and its treatment challenges add to the burden.
Try to find support among your family and friends. The concern and understanding of other people with hidradenitis suppurativa also might be comforting. Ask for help with your mental health and coping strategies. Your health care provider can refer you to a mental health professional or provide the contact information for a support group.
You'll likely first see your primary care provider. You might then be referred to a health care provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating skin diseases, also known as a dermatologist. Depending on the severity of your condition, your care also might involve specialists in colorectal surgery, plastic surgery or gastroenterology.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Also, note the questions to ask your health care provider, including:
Your health care provider is likely to ask you several questions, such as:

Hidradenitis suppurativa care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.