To diagnose long QT syndrome (LQTS), a healthcare professional examines you. You are usually asked questions about your symptoms and medical and family history. The health professional listens to your heart with a device called a stethoscope that's placed against your chest. If your healthcare professional thinks you have an irregular heartbeat, tests can be done to check the heart.
Tests are done to check the health of the heart and confirm long QT syndrome (LQTS).
A prolonged QT interval is an irregular heart rhythm. It is a change in how the heart's bottom chambers send signals. In a prolonged QT interval, it takes longer than usual for the heart to recharge between beats. A prolonged QT interval can be seen on a heart test called an electrocardiogram.
A prolonged QT interval is an irregular heart rhythm. It is a change in how the heart's bottom chambers send signals. In a prolonged QT interval, it takes longer than usual for the heart to recharge between beats. A prolonged QT interval can be seen on a heart test called an electrocardiogram.
An ECG is the most common test used to diagnose long QT syndrome. It records the electrical signals in the heart and shows how fast or how slow the heart is beating. Sticky patches called electrodes attach to the chest and sometimes the arms and legs. Wires connect the electrodes to a computer, which prints or displays the test results. The heart's signals are shown as waves on the test results.
An ideal QT interval depends on your age, your sex and your personal heart rate. In people who have a LQTS complication called torsades de pointes, the waves on the ECG results look twisted.
If long QT symptoms don't happen often, they may not be seen on a regular ECG. If so, your healthcare professional may ask you to wear a heart monitor at home. There are several different types.
Some personal devices, such as smartwatches, have sensors that can take an ECG. Ask your healthcare professional if this is an option for you.
These tests often involve walking on a treadmill or pedaling a stationary bike. A member of your care team checks your heart activity as you exercise. Exercise stress tests show how the heart reacts to physical activity. If you can't exercise, you may get medicine that increases the heart rate like exercise does. Sometimes an echocardiogram is done during a stress test.
A genetic test is available to confirm long QT syndrome (LQTS). The test checks for gene changes that can cause the disorder. Check with your insurer to see if it is covered.
If you have long QT syndrome, your healthcare team may suggest that other family members also get genetic testing to check for the disorder.
Genetic tests for long QT syndrome can't find all inherited cases of long QT syndrome. It's recommended that families speak to a genetic counselor before and after testing.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Long QT syndrome-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for long QT syndrome (LQTS) may include:
Your healthcare professional talks with you about your treatment options. Treatment depends on your symptoms and your type of long QT syndrome. You may need treatment even if you don't often have symptoms.
Some people with acquired long QT syndrome may get fluids or minerals, such as magnesium, through a needle in a vein.
If medicine causes long QT syndrome (LQTS), stopping the medicine may be all that's needed to treat the disorder. Your healthcare professional can tell you how to safely do so. Do not change or stop taking any medicines without talking to your healthcare team.
Some people with LQTS need medicines to treat symptoms and prevent life-threatening heart rhythm changes.
Medicines used to treat long QT syndrome may include:
Some people with long QT syndrome need surgery or a device to control the heartbeat. Surgery or other procedures used for LQTS treatment may include:
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). This device is placed under the skin near the collarbone. It continuously checks the heart rhythm. If the device finds an irregular heartbeat, it sends out low- or high-energy shocks to reset the heart's rhythm.
Most people with long QT syndrome don't need an ICD. But the device may be suggested for some athletes to help them return to competitive sports. The decision to place an ICD, especially in children, needs to be carefully considered. Placing an ICD requires surgery. Sometimes the device may send out shocks that aren't needed. Talk with your healthcare team about the benefits and risks of an ICD.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Your healthcare professional may suggest lifestyle changes to help you manage long QT syndrome (LQTS). These changes can lower the risk of a fainting spell or sudden cardiac death linked with LQTS.
Worrying about possible dangerous heart rhythms linked with long QT syndrome (LQTS) may cause stress for you and your loved ones. Here are some things that might help you manage your condition.
If you have pounding, fast or irregular heartbeats, make an appointment for a health checkup. You may be sent to a doctor trained in heart conditions. This type of healthcare professional is called a cardiologist.
You also might see a doctor trained in heart rhythm disorders, called an electrophysiologist.
Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment and know what to expect from your healthcare team.
Questions to ask the healthcare professional at your first appointment include:
Questions to ask if you're sent to a cardiologist or electrophysiologist include:
Questions to ask if your healthcare professional recommends surgery include:
Knowing as much as possible about your health and your family's health history helps your healthcare team learn your diagnosis and plan treatment.
While you wait for your appointment, ask your family members if anyone you're related to has a family history of long QT syndrome or unexplained death.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.