Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Sleeping pills may help when stress, travel or other disruptions keep you awake. For long-term insomnia, behavior changes learned in behavioral therapy are usually the best treatment.
If you regularly have trouble either falling or staying asleep — a condition called insomnia — make an appointment with your health care provider. Treatment depends on what's causing your insomnia. Sometimes, an underlying cause, such as a medical condition or a sleep-related disorder, can be found and treated — a much more effective approach than just treating the symptom of insomnia itself.
Behavior changes learned through cognitive behavioral therapy are generally the best treatment for ongoing insomnia. Sleeping on a regular schedule, exercising regularly, avoiding caffeine later in the day, avoiding daytime naps and keeping stress in check also are likely to help. But there are times when the addition of prescription sleeping pills may help you get some much-needed rest.
All prescription sleeping pills have risks, especially for people with certain medical conditions, including liver or kidney disease, and for older adults. Always talk with your health care provider before trying a new treatment for insomnia.
Here's information on some of the most common types of prescription sleeping pills used today.
Prescription sleeping pills may help you fall asleep easier or stay asleep longer — or both. The risks and benefits of various prescription sleeping pills can differ. To find the right prescription medicine to help you sleep, your health care provider generally should:
Insurance companies may have restrictions on which sleeping pills are covered. And they may require that you try other approaches first to try to manage your insomnia.
Prescription sleep medicine options include the following.
Always ask your health care provider about potential side effects before deciding which sleeping pills to consider taking. Depending on the type, prescription sleeping pills may include side effects such as:
Sometimes prescription medicines used mainly to treat depression may ease insomnia when taken in lower doses. Although widely used, these are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for insomnia. When insomnia is related to depression or anxiety, these antidepressants may be added to treatment.
Antidepressants that have a sedating effect may include side effects such as:
Prescription sleeping pills (and even some nonprescription sleeping aids), as well as certain antidepressants, may not be safe if you are pregnant, breastfeeding or an older adult. Sleeping pill use may increase the risk of nighttime falls and injury in older adults. If you're an older adult, your health care provider may prescribe a lower dose of medicine to reduce your risk of problems.
Some health conditions — for example, kidney disease, low blood pressure, heart rhythm problems or a history of seizures — may limit your options. Also, prescription sleeping pills and nonprescription sleep aids may interact with other medicines. And taking certain prescription sleeping pills can lead to drug misuse or drug dependence, so it's important to follow your health care provider's advice.
If your best attempts to get a good night's sleep have failed, prescription sleeping pills may be an option. Here's some advice on how to use them safely.
If you continue to have trouble sleeping, ask your health care provider for more help.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.