Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Mental Health / The mental health conversation your primary team wishes you would have
You probably know that modern mental health care doesn’t mean lying down on a couch and looking at ink blots. But you might not realize that for many folks, mental health care starts in primary care. Your primary care physician could be your first—and maybe only—stop on your way to mental wellness.
On this episode of Health Matters, we talk with Dr. Jen Brull, a family physician and the president of the American Academy of Family Physicians, about how to start that conversation with your primary care team, what they can and can’t treat, and even some things you might be too afraid to ask.
For more mental health resources from the AAFP, check out familydoctor.org. If you or a loved one is in crisis, you can also call or text 988, the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline.
Listen to The Mental Health Conversation Your Primary Team Wishes You Would Have
Kristen Meinzer: Hi there, this is Kristen Meinzer with a quick content warning before we jump into the episode. We’re talking about mental health, which includes mention of suicide. If this is a sensitive topic for you or anyone else listening, please take care. Thanks. 
You probably know that these days, mental health care doesn’t mean lying down on a sofa talking about your mother, while a bespectacled man takes notes. But you might not realize that for many folks, mental health care actually starts in primary care.
Your primary care physician could be the first stop on your journey to mental wellness. Maybe even the only stop you need. On this episode of “Health Matters,” we’re talking with Dr. Jen Brull, a family physician and the president of The American Academy of Family Physicians. She’s going to walk us through how to start that conversation with your primary care team, what they can — and can’t — treat, and even some things you might be too afraid to ask. Dr. Jen Bruhl. Welcome to the show.
Kristen Meinzer: We are so thrilled to have you here today, you and your expertise. Before we start, let’s just learn a little bit more about you, your experience as a primary care physician and in serving your patient’s mental health concerns.
Dr. Jen Brull: Absolutely. I had the joy and privilege of working in a little tiny town in Kansas called Plainville, for 20 years. I owned my own practice there. I had a full scope rural practice, which meant I saw patients in the office and the hospital and the ER, and the nursing home.
I delivered babies and did procedures, all kinds of fun things as a family doctor in that little tiny town. In that time I learned a lot about mental illness and the mental health of my patient population, and I absolutely draw on that experience now.
Currently, I’m serving as the president of the American Academy of Family Physicians, the AAFP, which is a membership organization of about 128,000 family doctors across the United States. In that role I get to represent primary care and family medicine, specifically across a genre of chronic diseases including mental health.
Kristen Meinzer: When people think of mental health care, they’re probably picturing a therapist, psychologist, psychiatrist, but unless you’re already being treated, your first touch point for mental health care might actually be in primary care. For a person who’s having mental health struggles, how can they get that conversation started with their primary care physician?
Dr. Jen Brull: Family physicians actually take care of lots of folks who have mental health worries or mental health diagnoses. Even beyond that first visit, we’re often your next visit and your next visit after that.
When you think about exploring the world of getting treatment for something that’s worrying you, a good place to start is just to say, I think something might be going on, and I wondered if we could have a conversation.
Just that will help your family doctor or your primary care physician know that there’s something important you want to talk about. Beyond that, some good questions to start with are, can you tell me a little bit about depression or anxiety, or ADHD, or whatever you might be worried about.
It’s also really great when you start your visit at the very beginning, they’ll say, what are you here for? Or something along those lines. Be bold and be clear and tell your doctor or their healthcare team that you want to talk about your mental health, that it’s important at that visit, because that allows that team to create space for those moments that you need.
Is it okay to bring it up during just your routine annual visit or when you’re getting your vaccines, or is this something that we should be making a separate special appointment for? A hundred percent it’s okay. Family doctors take care of everything and everyone from babies to people at the end of their life.
All of those folks have lots of things going on in their health picture. Maybe they have asthma or maybe they have diabetes. They often have other things like depression or anxiety going on in that same body. The beautiful thing about seeing a primary care physician is we take care of all of those things, and so having a conversation at an upcoming visit is always appropriate.
Kristen Meinzer: I just love your tone about all of this. Now, obviously you are not a mind reader, but are there certain symptoms or behaviors that might raise flags for you as far as patients and whether they might be struggling with mental health?
Dr. Jen Brull: Red flags. The big ones are worrying that you might harm others, or feeling like you might want to harm yourself. Those are the biggest and reddest flags there are. If you are having any of those, you absolutely want to get help immediately.
Don’t wait. Don’t wait for that next visit. Call today to get help. Other things that people might notice if they are struggling with mental illness are things like a loss of appetite, or negative thoughts about yourself, or feeling worried, or anxious, or even feeling irritable, or moody.
Someone may tell you, ”You look grouchy,” and you think, “I do feel grouchy.” Sometimes it can be as mild as just not enjoying life as much as you used to, or not finding pleasure in the events and things that used to bring you joy. Sleep is also a really common symptom, so not being able to sleep, not being able to stay asleep, or not having restful sleep.
As you can tell it’s a very broad list of symptoms that might be part of mental illness. Unfortunately, these symptoms can also be parts of other chronic diseases, that’s why that primary care physician is so important because they can help you sort out this from that.
Kristen Meinzer: How many of these things that you’re bringing up are different depending on age group or more likely to appear at certain stages in people’s lives?
Dr. Jen Brull: The statistics tell us that people of all ages have depression and anxiety, and particularly that age range is moving down. We used to think that younger humans were less likely to have depression, and to some extent, depression and anxiety are less common in pediatric ages. But as you move into your pre-adolescent, teen years, young adult years, they’re prevalent. They’re also present at the end of our lives as we age.
One of the things that’s really important to do is think about that and have that longitudinal, continuous relationship with your primary care doctor so that over time they may notice differences or changes in how you are or how you’re interacting with the world.
Kristen Meinzer: I’ve noticed over the years that some doctor’s offices require me to fill out an intake form before every visit. “How have you been feeling lately? Are you sleeping well enough,” and so on. Can you talk a little bit about why those questions are on those forms and what you as a primary care physician use that information to do or to assess?
Dr. Jen Brull: We often look to evidence-based guidelines to tell us what are good things to do on a regular basis for our patients. This can be things like recommending breast cancer screening or colorectal cancer screening. It also means screening for mental illness.
One of the most common forms is called a PHQ nine, which has, you guessed it, no questions related to depression. But the shortest way is a PHQ two, which has literally two questions that we can use to screen and decide if someone is at increased risk, and if that’s positive, we can ask the longer form or dive deeper into those conversations.
That information is not used to report you to a data bank or share data with anyone outside your care team. It’s used to make sure that the treatment you receive in your primary care doctor’s office is individualized and the right thing for you.
Kristen Meinzer: What are some of the questions?
Dr. Jen Brull: Often it’s things like “do you enjoy your life or are you sleeping well?” Or questions about feeling irritable. On each one of those, there’s a scale, everything from “that happens zero days in the last two weeks” to, “that happens pretty much every day in the last two weeks,” and with that we can generate a score.
The higher the score, the more often you’re experiencing the symptoms, and the more symptoms you have, the higher risk you are for having a diagnosis of depression.
There’s a similar form for anxiety called the GAD-7. Guess what? It has 7 questions and we use those. We know that they work to tell us how often you are having these symptoms and whether those diagnoses are likely for you.
Kristen Meinzer: While you’re looking over those assessment questions, how do you figure out if there’s also a contributing or overlapping physical condition, like let’s say a vitamin D deficiency or hormonal fluctuations due to perimenopause, for example?
Dr. Jen Brull: That is all part of a great conversation with a family doctor, and that’s exactly why getting your mental health treatment from your primary care physician is so important because they aren’t just looking at one thing. They aren’t looking at one moment in time.
They’re thinking about their entire relationship with you. All the things that are going on on your body, the medicines that you’re taking. The history that you have presented, and they help you think through that. If you say, I have been really tired and I am worried that I have depression, we’re going to explore beyond that moment and we’re going to think about things like, alright, what does the rest of your PHQ nine look like?
Are you at risk for things like thyroid disease or heart disease that could equally be causing that symptom? Having one symptom or a couple of symptoms does not mean a diagnosis. It means the start of a conversation.
Starting a conversation about mental health with your primary care physician is as simple as a few words: “I think there might be something going on, and I’d like to have a conversation about it.”
Signs your doctor might look for, or that you might notice on your own, are negative thoughts about yourself, feeling irritable, grouchy, or moody; feeling worried or anxious; loss of appetite, less interest in things you used to enjoy, and issues with sleep.
If you feel like you might hurt yourself or others, you should seek help immediately. Your primary care physician may use forms like the PHQ-2, PHQ-9, and GAD-7 to screen you on a regular basis or assess the severity of your symptoms.
They’ll also consider the big picture of your health: whether you have any medical conditions that could be causing, contributing to, or exacerbating your symptoms. That’s step one. Let’s talk about what comes next after that initial conversation.
Kristen Meinzer: Now, Dr. Brull, a lot of people think of primary care as the place where a doctor might see that you have a mental health concern and then just refer you elsewhere, like, here’s a phone number, call somebody else. Let’s just settle that right now. What types of mental health interventions can and can’t primary care physicians provide?
Dr. Jen Brull: The can list is huge and the can’t list is really, really small. What can’t family doctors do? It’s more about what can’t they do in the setting that you’re in. If, for example, you came to your family doctor’s office and you said, I am feeling suicidal. I have a plan to commit suicide.
It would be most appropriate to help you get immediately to an inpatient facility that could help you treat that acute problem in that moment. Taking care of that in the office is something that’s really hard. Outside of that, there aren’t many things I can think of that family doctors don’t do in the world of mental illness in their offices.
We prescribe medications. We often do therapy or link in our offices to a behavioral health specialist who you could see right there in the office. We work on lifestyle changes, behavior modification, and certainly management of other chronic diseases which can contribute to depression, anxiety, and other mental health conditions. We’re a really good place to start and often a really great place to stay.
Kristen Meinzer: Very reassuring. Are there certain treatments that require an in-person exam versus telehealth? Are there times where it has to be done in person?
Dr. Jen Brull: A few. I want to harken back to what else this could be. If you are coming in with an undifferentiated complaint, meaning we don’t know why you have a certain symptom, it’s probably really important that you start in person so that I or your family doctor can do things like palpate your thyroid and listen to your heart and your lungs, and make sure that there aren’t other physical signs or symptoms that may be contributing to what’s going on.
Telehealth is great. It’s wonderful for things like medication follow-ups or if you can’t get to us for some reason. Think that recognizing the balance of when one is appropriate over the other works really well.
Kristen Meinzer: I’m also curious about the relationship between care from primary care physicians and folks like psychologists or psychiatrists. But first — can you explain what the difference is between all three of these?
Dr. Jen Brull: A family physician or other primary care physician is a medical doctor. They went to medical school and they did three or four years of work after medical school in a postgraduate program called Residency which is specialized training in fields that they chose.
Both family doctors and general internists who are internal medicine doctors who take care of the whole patient and pediatricians will have completed at least seven, if not eight years of training after college. A psychologist is a trained counselor, but not a medical doctor.
They have often done an undergraduate degree and a Master’s program, or even a PhD program. Psychologists don’t prescribe medications in almost all states, in almost all instances. There are a few exceptions, and so they’re going to be thinking more along the lines of cognitive behavioral therapy or specific modalities that may help you get better from your illness.
A psychiatrist is also a medical doctor and has done the same sort of training as a primary care physician. After medical school, all of those folks split off and do residency training. A psychiatrist, instead of learning as I did about everybody and all conditions, they learn about everybody and mental health.
They are equipped to go a little deeper, understand a little bit more about when we run into barriers and how we can solve those challenges together.
Kristen Meinzer: In what cases would a primary care physician refer someone to a psychologist or psychiatrist instead of treating the condition themselves?
Dr. Jen Brull: Psychologists are great partners in care in terms of helping people who have mental illness, and the way that I often referred to them was in a collaborative way. I may not have time in my office to do cognitive behavioral therapy or another modality that might benefit that patient, which requires an hour at a time, sometimes every week.
A psychologist would be a great partner for that sort of care. I would work on medicines. They would work on therapy and we would do that together.
Now, a psychiatrist is someone that I might refer to if I had worked with a patient extensively and that person was on more than one medication and we were still struggling to control their depression or anxiety, and I wanted extra help in the space of multiple medications or higher doses of medications then I would typically prescribe.
Kristen Meinzer: It’s great that everyone’s working in collaboration with each other. What is the ongoing role of primary care in someone’s mental health treatment plan?
Dr. Jen Brull: Family doctors and other primary care physicians play a key ongoing role for mental health treatment by providing continuous support and monitoring and adjustments.
Because of that lifelong relationship, we know your health history, we know your environment, which helps us when we need to change medicines or track progress or adjust treatment as needed.
Family doctors and other primary care physicians are also there just to check on your overall well-being and if necessary, could refer you further, so that you can work together.
Kristen Meinzer: What are some of the benefits for patients of treating mental health in primary care?
Dr. Jen Brull: That’s when you see your primary care doctor for anything, whether it’s mental health, acute issues, chronic disease, that care is longitudinal and comprehensive.
It’s holistic and centered on you in the context of your family, your environment, your life. All of those things mean that there’s a lot of trust when you see your primary care doctor, and you don’t have to start over in a relationship to talk about something that’s probably pretty hard.
That brings comfort to the possibility that you’re going to go see somebody about something that’s worrying you.
Kristen Meinzer: Now, there has been a trend toward more and more people treating mental health concerns in primary care versus seeking professionals who specialize in mental health. Do you know what’s driving that pattern?
Dr. Jen Brull: I suspect there are a lot of things. One, there aren’t enough psychiatrists or psychologists to take care of every patient in the United States who has a mental health condition.
That’s the facts. Being able to access it more quickly your primary care physician often drives that trend. The other thing is people may feel more comfortable, more familiar, more convenient, and more comprehensive about their primary care doctor.
Of note there aren’t enough primary care doctors in the world. There also aren’t enough psychiatrists in the world. Family doctors, by helping take care of patients who have mental health diagnoses make it easier for psychiatrists to be able to see those who have the most complex mental illness.
It turns out your primary care physician can offer many types of mental health care: lifestyle changes, behavioral interventions, medications — maybe even therapy — as well as helping you manage your other health conditions.
If your primary care doctor is someone who already understands your health history and who you’re more comfortable with, it might be easier for you to treat mental health in that setting.
You could get referred to another specialist if your primary care physician needs outside knowledge or resources. For example, not all primary care physicians have the bandwidth to do weekly therapy, so a psychologist might be a better fit for that.
Or if you have a complex mental health condition with multiple medications, you could need a psychiatrist’s expertise to finish things out. We’re going to break down some misconceptions, assumptions, and questions around mental health care.
Kristen Meinzer: I gotta say, it seems these days a lot of people are unfortunately struggling. Do you have any ideas as to why?
Dr. Jen Brull: The world is very different than it was 50 years ago in both the culture of being able to talk about things like mental health and the stresses that are placed on people every day.
If you think about the sheer number of information, I’m going to call them bombs that can hit people each and every day. You look at social media, you see the television. Heck, you open your browser, chances are what you see might be stressful for you or for someone you love and no way to avoid that. Those things are why we are seeing more people with mental health diagnoses now than we were 50 years ago.
Kristen Meinzer: What level of stress or feeling sad or wound up what level is normal versus a cause for concern?
Dr. Jen Brull: Normal depends on the person. It depends on their baseline personality, resilience, and situations. Someone who lives in a nice home, in a good neighborhood, in a town that is safe, can probably tolerate a little bit more stress than someone who is unhoused or doesn’t live in a safe place or doesn’t have access to food.
When we think about how much is okay, it really depends on context. Now everybody, everybody has some level of stress. Feeling stressed or a little bit down or a little bit depressed can be normal for a few days. If you feel sad, stressed, worn down, anxious, depressed, any of those for a period of time that lasts more than two weeks, it is time to go talk to somebody, and I don’t necessarily mean that on
Monday you felt stressed, but Tuesday was amazing, and then Wednesday you felt stressed, but Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday were amazing. It’s not that undulating stress, but in the last two weeks, there are more days than not where I didn’t sleep well, where I felt irritable, where I felt down, where I felt sad, where I didn’t enjoy life.
That’s not okay, and you should have a conversation with your family doctor. Now, if you’re trying to sort out “Where am I on this spectrum?” I want to point out a great resource. The American Academy of Family Physicians hosts a website, it’s called family doctor.org, all one word. It is available to anyone, and it’s available for you on lots of topics that you might have questions about.
Definitely about mental illness, mental health, how to know what’s normal, how to know what’s not normal, and is this okay to wait and see if it gets better or do I really need to take action today?
Kristen Meinzer: Let’s say somebody does take action, but they feel like their doctor isn’t really taking their concerns as seriously as they’d like about their mental health. What advice do you have there?
Dr. Jen Brull: Everybody has an off day and I would hope that if that happened to someone, it would be because their doctor had an off day. The first thing I would say is, you are your best advocate and truth-teller, and the best thing you can do in that moment is say, “I’m really worried about this. Can we back up and talk some more?”
Because that’s a cue to anyone’s brain who’s listening to say, ”Oh, gosh. Yes, I’m having a terrible day. Yes, I’m running 20 minutes behind. Yes, the next patient is maybe not my favorite person, and yes, I need to take care of this person who’s in front of me right now.”
Now, if you do that, if you advocate for yourself and you still don’t get a response, it’s time to find a different primary care physician, and making sure that you have the best primary care doctor, just like you would find the best car repairman, is as important to you as it is to your car.
Kristen Meinzer: Absolutely. Now, a lot of people with suicidal thoughts are hesitant to bring it up with a physician because they’re scared they might get hospitalized, but it is so important to get help. Let’s demystify that process by talking about what actually happens when somebody has suicidal thoughts and isn’t in immediate danger. Let’s say a patient comes to you, how would you respond to that patient saying, I don’t have a plan. But I’ve been having these feelings.
Dr. Jen Brull: You’re right. Saying those words out loud. I have thoughts of hurting myself. I have had thoughts of harm. I worry about suicide. It is scary. It’s scary to hold them inside you, and it is scary to say them out loud.
A primary care doctor is first going to make it very clear that this is a safe space to share worries, to talk about things, and to be very truthful and transparent about what’s going on. If there’s no active plan, if the person says, “I am feeling so depressed that I have thoughts that the world would be better off without me,” and I say to them, “Oh, I’m really sorry to hear that. Tell me a little bit more, is there a plan that you’ve made?” Then they say, “Oh, no, no. I don’t think I could ever do it. I just, I just think about it.”
That’s the start of a great conversation where we get to unpack what’s going on, what’s making that person feel that way in this moment, and how we can seek treatment both today to get started and in the longer term to stay well. Now if a person does have thoughts, yes, I’ve thought of ways, but I’m not planning to do it. I’ve just thought of it.
That’s a little bit of a different conversation and we may want to think about things. If they say, “I’ve thought about killing myself with a gun,” my next question is going to be, “Do you have a gun?”
Dr. Jen Brull: I’m going to be just as transparent about my worries as theirs. Then we’re going to make a plan for how we remove that worry from their life. Could they have someone come to their house and take their gun, keep it away from them so that they are one layer safer?
Those are all conversations we can have. Now, if someone says, “I want to kill myself today. I have a plan, I have a method, I’m going to do it.” Then we move into a different mode. Again, it’s a safe space, but our plan is to work together to get them to an even safer place until that moment passes for them.
Oftentimes that’s in a hospital with a team of people who are designed to help them through that crisis. Just like we would want someone who was having a heart attack to go to the hospital, to have a cardiologist open up that blood vessel that is not letting oxygen through.
We want this person to get to a hospital and have a team that can open up their worlds and let them see a path forward.
Kristen Meinzer: Hospitalization may sound terrifying. In some cases it is necessary, but it’s not going to be across the board what happens to every patient who talks with you about it.
Dr. Jen Brull: No. In fact, it’s very uncommon because most people will say, “I’ve thought of it. I don’t have an active plan,” and that just lets us know how urgent the situation is for us to begin treatment.
Kristen Meinzer: For people out there who might be struggling with their mental health, but are afraid to speak up to their physician, for example, maybe they’re worried about potential stigma or might feel like they’re bothering their doctor, or this isn’t really the doctor’s job. What do you want them to know?
Dr. Jen Brull: You are not a bother. You are a person and doctors every day are helping people with all kinds of things, including mental health. Just like you wouldn’t hesitate to come to a doctor if you thought you’d broken your leg. You shouldn’t hesitate to come to a doctor if you think you have depression or anxiety.
I get it that it can feel scary. It absolutely can feel scary. Maybe you’re worried about being judged or you think it’s not serious enough to mention, but trust me, it’s important. You are important, so make that first step. Make the call, make the appointment, say the words. Those are all important.
Kristen Meinzer: Do you have an example of one of your patients who was able to speak up and get care and how it improved their life?
Dr. Jen Brull: Oh, boy, do I! I practiced family medicine for 20 years in a little community called Plainville, Kansas. It’s a town of about 2,000 people. Very rural. I was very much connected to my patients, to my community, and I often joked with my colleagues who practiced in urban medicine that I could either choose to be friends with my patients or I could choose to have no friends or no patients.
I was friends with community members and church partners and four H partners with patients and parents alike. One of the most impactful stories about screening for mental health comes from a long standing relationship with a patient.
He was in his fifties and had seen me for probably a decade at that point in time. He was very reserved, very quiet, and often our visits were pretty brief. We, like many family physician offices across the country, screen for depression at least once a year in our patients.
He came in for a routine annual visit in which we traditionally did all screenings and talked about preventive health, and he answered the pH HQ-2 positively. My nurse, being a stellar rockstar, knew that the very next thing was to hand him a PHQ-9, which is the full questionnaire.
The PHQ-9 was globally positive, like he maxed the scale pretty much everywhere. When I walked in the room, I knew this was going to be a different conversation than our traditional brief, “Hey, how are you? I’m doing fine. Your numbers look great. I’ll see you in 6 months.
As I remember, I was surprised. I walked in and I shared my genuine surprise with the patient and said, “Thanks for filling this out. I know that took a lot of courage,” and it really surprised me. His response surprised me too. “I didn’t plan to tell you today.”
Dr. Jen Brull: He shared that he was acutely suicidal, that he had access to his method of intent, which was to go in the country and shoot himself. He had a gun. He mentioned that he had on more than one occasion gotten in his car with the gun with that intent. As he said, he chickened out.
When I said, “what made you tell me today,” his response was, “I’m either scared enough or brave enough.” He didn’t wind up getting admitted to the hospital, although that was my recommendation. We made a plan for safety with a family member who he was willing to trust with this information.
We had daily visits for the rest of the week. Then when he was more stable and he was on medication that was helping him, weekly visits and then monthly visits, and then finally we got back to a place where he could honestly, on the PHQ-9, be in mild depression, which for him was a huge change.
For the next however many years it was until I left Plainville and closed my practice, he stayed in remission. Every once in a while it occurs to me that those moments when we are privileged, when family doctors are privileged to be in the room with patients when they are at their most vulnerable, are the moments that make us stay in the work that we’re doing and recognize the value of what happens every day in a primary care office.
Kristen Meinzer: Wow. Kudos to that patient for speaking up, and to you for just being the outstanding doctor who was there to hear it. Primary care physicians can do so much for us in so many ways, including our mental health, and it’s so great talking with you and getting that reassurance from you. Thank you so much, Dr. Jen Brull. We really appreciate it.
Dr. Jen Brull: Thank you for having me. This was a lot of fun.
Kristen Meinzer: It definitely feels like the world is getting more stressful and chaotic. If you’re struggling, you’re not the only one. If you find in the last two weeks you had more bad days than good or neutral days, it may be time to talk with your doctor. Remember, it’s important—and totally okay—to share with a doctor if you’ve had suicidal thoughts.
Most people with these thoughts don’t end up hospitalized. More likely, your doctor has an honest conversation with you about what you’re feeling, and comes up with a plan to keep you safe and figure out long-term treatment.
Last, but not least, don’t be afraid to be your own advocate. Your mental health matters. Your primary care physician will want to make sure you’re as healthy as possible, both outside and in.
If you want more resources on mental health, you can check out familydoctor.org from the American Academy of Family Physicians. We’ll put a link to that in the show notes. If you’re having a mental health crisis, you can also call or text 988, the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. Okay, that’s all for this episode.
But if you’ve got a question, a topic suggestion, or a follow-up question about this episode, you can leave us a voicemail at (507) 538-6272. We might even feature your voice on the show!
Stay tuned for the next episode of “Health Matters,” “A Field Guide To Outdoor First Aid.”
Dr. Jen Brull: Yeah, no one’s mouth is sterile. Everybody’s got bugs. Even the cute seal.
Kristen Meinzer: For more “Health Matters” episodes and resources, head to mayoclinic.org/healthmatters. If you found this show helpful, please subscribe, and make sure to rate and review us on your podcast app — it really helps others find our show. Thanks for listening, and until next time, take care and stay healthy.
Mayo Clinic Family Health Book, Fifth Edition
Scott C. Litin, M.D. With a 48-page visual guide that helps readers have a better understanding of human anatomy, Mayo Clinic Family Health Book is a must-have guide for understanding healthy living at all stages of life. This reference manual provides a clear look at the causes, symptoms and treatment…
Discover more Mental Health content from articles, podcasts, to videos.

      Kristen Meinzer is an award-winning podcaster and author, and the host of Mayo Clinic Health Matters podcast. Her podcasts, including The Pursuit of Happier and Innovation Uncovered, have been named to best-of lists by Time, O The Oprah Magazine, Vulture, Indiewire, and more. Kristen regularly appears on the BBC, CBC, NPR, CNN, Vox, and other outlets. 
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.