Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Petroleum jelly is generally safe to use. But rarely, breathing in (inhaling) fat-based substances (lipoids) — such as petroleum jelly or mineral oil — for long periods can cause lung problems.
Petroleum jelly applied to the inside of the nostrils usually drains down the back of the nose with normal nasal secretions. Then it is swallowed. Rarely, small amounts of the jelly can travel into the windpipe (trachea) and lungs. Over many months, the jelly can build up in the lungs. This buildup can lead to potentially serious swelling and irritation (inflammation) in the lungs known as lipoid pneumonia.
In some people, lipoid pneumonia causes no signs or symptoms. In others, lipoid pneumonia may cause cough, chest pain or shortness of breath.
Lipoid pneumonia is often found on a chest X-ray or CT scan. Sometimes, a doctor confirms the diagnosis with a bronchoscopy.
When lipoid pneumonia is caused by petroleum jelly, then generally the only treatment is to stop the use of the jelly.
If you have concerns about the use of petroleum jelly, relieve nasal dryness by using a vaporizer or humidifier instead or try over-the-counter saline nasal spray. If you must use a lubricant, choose the water-soluble variety. Use it only sparingly and not within several hours of lying down.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.