During robot-assisted heart surgery, a surgeon works at a remote console controlling the robotic instruments, which use small, precise movements to perform the surgery.
During robot-assisted heart surgery, a surgeon works at a remote console controlling the robotic instruments, which use small, precise movements to perform the surgery.
Robotic surgery allows doctors to perform many types of complex procedures with more precision, flexibility and control than is possible with traditional procedures. Robotic surgery is often performed through tiny incisions. But sometimes it's used in open surgeries.
Robotic surgery also is called robot-assisted surgery.
Most often, a robotic surgery system includes a camera arm and mechanical arms with surgical instruments attached to them. The surgeon controls the arms while seated at a control center, called a console, near the operating table. The surgeon sees a magnified, high-definition, 3D view of the surgical site.
The surgeon leads other team members who assist during the operation.
Surgeons who use the robotic system find that it can increase precision, flexibility and control during the operation. The robotic system also allows them to better see the site, compared with traditional surgical methods. Using robotic surgery, surgeons can perform delicate and complex procedures that may be difficult or impossible with other methods.
Robotic surgery often is done through tiny openings in the skin and other tissues. This approach is called a minimally invasive surgery. The benefits of minimally invasive surgery include:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Robotic surgery involves risk, some of which may be similar to risks of traditional open surgery, such as a small risk of infection and other complications.
Robotic surgery isn't an option for everyone. Talk with your doctor about the benefits and risks of robotic surgery. Ask how it compares with other techniques, such as other types of minimally invasive surgery and traditional open surgery.
Robotic surgery may not be available at medical centers near you.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.