Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Medicines that you take by mouth are called oral medicines. They're often the first line of treatment for trouble getting or keeping an erection, called erectile dysfunction (ED). Oral medicines for ED usually work well and cause few side effects.
The four main medicines taken by mouth for erectile dysfunction are:
These medicines are called PDE5 inhibitors. They enhance the effects of a chemical the body makes that relaxes muscles in the penis, called nitric oxide. This boosts blood flow and helps you get an erection from sexual activity.
Each oral medicine for ED has a slightly different chemical makeup. These small differences affect the way each medication works, such as how quickly it takes effect and wears off, and the possible side effects. Your doctor or other health care professional can recommend one for you based on these factors, other health conditions you have and any other medicines you take.
Vardenafil. This medicine also works best when you take it an hour before sex on an empty stomach. As with sildenafil, a high-fat meal or alcohol keep the body from absorbing it as quickly.
Vardenafil usually works for 4 to 5 hours. Its effects might last longer if you have mild to moderate ED. A newer form of the medicine that dissolves on the tongue might work faster than the pill that you swallow.
These medicines all work well for ED. When choosing one, tell your doctor or other health care professional what your preferences are, such as cost, ease of use, how long the drug's effects last and side effects. Generic versions of sildenafil, vardenafil and tadalafil are available.
Check with your health care team before you take any medicine for erectile dysfunction. Oral ED medicines might not work or might be dangerous if you also take any of the following:
Oral medicine for ED also might not be safe or work well if you have:
Side effects of oral ED medicines are often mild. Common ones include:
Rarely, more-serious side effects can happen, including:
Treatments for erectile dysfunction are big business, and online scams abound. If you do buy medicines over the internet:
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to
        get started.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.