A skin cancer diagnosis often starts with an exam of your skin. A healthcare professional might remove some skin to test it for cancer.
A healthcare professional might start by asking about your symptoms and looking at your skin.
A biopsy is a procedure to remove a sample of tissue for testing in a lab. To get a piece of skin, a healthcare professional may use a cutting tool to cut away some or all of the worrying skin growth. Often a skin biopsy happens in a healthcare professional's office. Medicine numbs the area so you won't feel pain.
The skin tissue sample goes to a lab for testing. Tests can show whether the sample contains cancer cells.
Some people with skin cancer may need other tests to find out whether the cancer has spread. This is called cancer staging. The stage of the cancer tells the healthcare team about its size and whether it has spread.
Not everyone with skin cancer needs cancer staging. Most skin cancers don't spread. For example, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma aren't likely to spread. These are the most common types of skin cancer. If your healthcare professional thinks there's a risk that your cancer may have spread, you might have staging tests. The cancer is more likely to spread if it grows large or if it's a kind of skin cancer that often spreads, such as melanoma.
Your healthcare team uses the results of these tests to give your cancer a stage. The stages of skin cancer range from 0 to 4. Exactly what these numbers mean depends on the kind of skin cancer and where it happens on the body. In general, the lower numbers mean the skin cancer is small and only affects the outer layer of the skin. As the skin cancer grows deeper into the skin or spreads, the stages get higher. A stage 4 skin cancer often is a cancer that has spread to the lymph nodes or to other parts of the body.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your skin cancer-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for skin cancer can involve surgery to remove the cancer or treatments applied to the skin to kill the cancer cells. Sometimes stronger cancer treatments are needed for skin cancer. These might include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy and immunotherapy.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any skin changes that worry you. If your healthcare professional thinks you might have skin cancer, that person may refer you to a specialist. Often this is a doctor who diagnoses and treats skin conditions, called a dermatologist.
Appointments can be brief, so it's a good idea to be prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready.
Ask a family member or friend to go with you to the appointment to help you remember the information you get.
Some basic questions to ask about skin cancer include:
Ask any other questions that you think of during your appointment.
Your healthcare professional likely will ask about your symptoms. Be ready to answer questions such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.