To diagnose a concussion, your healthcare professional evaluates your symptoms and reviews your medical history. You may need tests that help diagnose a concussion. Tests may include a neurological exam, cognitive testing and imaging tests.
Your healthcare professional asks detailed questions about your injury and then performs a neurological exam. This evaluation includes checking your:
Your healthcare professional may conduct several tests to evaluate your thinking skills, also known as cognitive skills. Testing may evaluate several factors, including your:
Brain imaging may be recommended for some people who have had a concussion. Imaging may be done in people with symptoms such as bad headaches, seizures, repeated vomiting or symptoms that are becoming worse. Imaging tests may determine whether the injury has caused bleeding or swelling in the skull.
A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the head is the standard test in adults to assess the brain right after injury. A CT scan uses a series of X-rays to obtain cross-sectional images of the skull and brain.
For children with a suspected concussion, CT scans are used only if specific criteria are met, such as the type of injury or signs of a skull fracture. This is to limit radiation exposure in young children.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to identify changes in your brain or to diagnose complications that may occur after a concussion. An MRI uses powerful magnets and radio waves to produce detailed images of your brain.
After a diagnosis of a concussion, you or your child may need to be hospitalized overnight for observation.
Or your healthcare professional may agree that you or your child can be observed at home. Have someone stay with you and check on you for at least 24 hours to ensure that your symptoms aren't getting worse.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your concussion-related health concerns
					Start Here


There are steps you can take to help your brain heal and speed recovery.
In the first couple of days after a concussion, relative rest allows your brain to recover. Healthcare professionals recommend that you physically and mentally rest during this time. However, complete rest, such as lying in a dark room without any stimuli, does not help recovery and is not recommended.
In the first 48 hours, limit activities that require a lot of concentration if those activities makes your symptoms worse. This includes playing video games, watching TV, doing schoolwork, reading, texting or using a computer.
Don't do physical activities that increase your symptoms. This may include general physical exertion, sports or any vigorous movements. Don't do these activities until they no longer provoke your symptoms.
After a period of relative rest, gradually increase daily activities if you can tolerate them without triggering symptoms. You can start both physical and mental activities at levels that do not cause a major worsening of symptoms.
Light exercise and physical activity as tolerated starting a couple of days after injury have been shown to speed recovery. Activities might include riding a stationary bike or light jogging. But don't engage in any activities that have a high risk of another head impact until you are fully recovered.
Your healthcare professional may recommend that you have shortened school days or workdays. You may need to take breaks during the day, or have modified or reduced school workloads or work assignments as you recover.
Your healthcare professional also may recommend different therapies. You may need rehabilitation for symptoms related to vision, balance, or thinking and memory.
As your symptoms improve, you may gradually add more activities that involve thinking. You may do more schoolwork or work assignments, or increase your time spent at school or work.
Some physical activity can help speed brain recovery. Specific return to physical activity sport protocols may be suggested by your healthcare professional. These typically involve specific levels of physical activity to make sure you return to activity safely. Don't resume contact sports until you are symptom-free and cleared by your healthcare professional.
Headaches may occur in the days or weeks after a concussion. To manage pain, ask your healthcare professional if it's safe to take a pain reliever such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others). Don't take other pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and aspirin. These medicines may increase the risk of bleeding.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
It's important for anyone who has a head injury to be evaluated by a healthcare professional, even if emergency care isn't required.
If your child has received a head injury that concerns you, call your child's healthcare professional right away. Depending on the symptoms, your healthcare professional may recommend that your child get medical care right away.
Here's some information to help you get ready for and make the most of your medical appointment.
For a concussion, some basic questions to ask include:
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask questions that come up during your appointment.
Being ready to answer your healthcare professional's questions may reserve time to go over any points you want to talk about in-depth.
You or your child should be prepared to answer the following questions about the injury and related symptoms:
Before your appointment, don't do activities that increase your symptoms and risk another head injury. This includes not playing sports or activities that require vigorous movements.
Gradually resume your usual daily activities, including screen time, as you're able to tolerate them without worsening symptoms.
If you have a headache, acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may ease the pain. Don't take other pain relievers such as aspirin or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) if you suspect you've had a concussion. These may increase the risk of bleeding.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.