Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Do you take aspirin or acetaminophen for all your headaches? For some types of headaches, that's not the best approach. Here's why.
Your head hurts. Again. The first step in foiling your frequent headaches is determining what type of headache you have. Sometimes headaches are a symptom of another disease or condition; sometimes there's no clear cause.
Take a close look at your headache signs and symptoms. Keeping a headache diary might help determine your headache type. Note when your headaches occur, your symptoms, and potential triggers, such as food, stress or changes in sleep.
There are many types and sub-types of headaches. Chronic daily headaches, which occur 15 days or more a month, are one sub-type. Tension-type headaches and migraines are also common sub-types of headaches. They can both be chronic, though they aren't always. Other types of chronic daily headaches include:
Tension-type headaches, the most common variety of headaches:
Most occasional tension-type headaches are easily treated with over-the-counter medications, including:
Daily prescription medications, including tricyclic antidepressants, might manage chronic tension-type headaches. Alternative therapies aimed at stress reduction might help. They include:


Cognitive behavioral therapy
Biofeedback
Massage therapy
Acupuncture


Migraines


Migraines are another common type of headache. They affect three times more women than men. Migraines typically:

Cause pain that is moderate to severe
Pulsate
Cause nausea, vomiting, or increased sensitivity to light or sound
Affect only one side of your head, but can affect both sides
Worsen with activity such as climbing steps
Last from four to 72 hours without treatment

Treatment
Migraine treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms and preventing additional attacks. If you know what triggers your migraines, avoiding those triggers and learning how to manage them can help prevent migraines or lessen the pain. Treatment might include:

Rest in a quiet, dark room
Hot or cold compresses to your head or neck
Massage and small amounts of caffeine
Over-the-counter medications such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) and aspirin
Prescription medications including triptans, such as sumatriptan (Imitrex) and zolmitriptan (Zomig)
Preventive medications such as metoprolol (Lopressor), propranolol (Innopran, Inderal, others), amitriptyline, divalproex (Depakote), topiramate (Qudexy XR, Trokendi XR ,Topamax) or erenumab-aooe (Aimovig)


Recognize emergency symptoms


Seek emergency care if you have:

A very severe, sudden headache
Headache after a head injury or fall
Fever, stiff neck, rash, confusion, seizure, double vision, weakness, numbness or difficulty speaking
Pain that worsens despite treatment

These symptoms suggest a more serious condition, so it's important to get a prompt diagnosis and treatment.

Take control


Almost everyone gets headaches, and many are nothing to worry about. But if headaches are disrupting your activities, work or personal life, it's time to see your doctor. Headaches can't always be prevented, but your doctor can help you manage the symptoms.







                 
            




There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.

From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
                        
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.














Email



 Address 1



ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address

Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.

We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.


Subscribe!




Thank you for subscribing!

Migraines are another common type of headache. They affect three times more women than men. Migraines typically:
Migraine treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms and preventing additional attacks. If you know what triggers your migraines, avoiding those triggers and learning how to manage them can help prevent migraines or lessen the pain. Treatment might include:
These symptoms suggest a more serious condition, so it's important to get a prompt diagnosis and treatment.
Almost everyone gets headaches, and many are nothing to worry about. But if headaches are disrupting your activities, work or personal life, it's time to see your doctor. Headaches can't always be prevented, but your doctor can help you manage the symptoms.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.