Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Piercings might be more common than ever, but don't take piercing lightly. Know the risks and understand safety steps.
Ears. Lips. Bellybuttons. Eyebrows. Piercings are popular, especially among teen and young adults. But piercings can sometimes lead to health concerns. Learn the steps you can take to help a piercing heal well.
A piercing makes an opening in a part of the body where you can wear jewelry. All piercings carry a risk of health problems developing afterward. Those risks include:
You might need medicine or other treatment if you develop an allergic reaction, infection or other skin problems near the piercing.
Before you get a piercing, think carefully about it. If you're unsure about the piercing or worry that you might regret it, you may want to wait. Don't let other people pressure you into getting a piercing. And don't get a piercing if you've been drinking alcohol or using drugs.
If you're confident you want to get a piercing, talk to friends who have a similar piercing. Ask if they have suggestions or tips for you.
To make sure your piercing is done safely, ask these questions:
Who does the piercings? Go to a piercing studio or store that has properly trained employees. Don't try to pierce yourself. And don't let a friend who doesn't have training do the piercing.
Piercing rules and licensing vary from state to state. Check with your city, county or state health department for information on local licensing and regulations.
The skin around a new piercing might be swollen, red and tender for a few days. It might bleed slightly. If the swelling, redness and bleeding last longer than a few days, contact your healthcare professional. Getting treatment right away can help prevent medical problems related to piercings that could become serious.
To prevent infection and encourage healing:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.