Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Understand how different vaccine technologies work with the immune system to provide protection.
COVID-19 vaccines lower your risk of getting sick, seriously ill or dying from the disease. But how do the different types of COVID-19 vaccines work?
Each COVID-19 vaccine causes the immune system to create proteins called antibodies. These proteins fight infection with the COVID-19 virus. COVID-19 vaccines use a harmless version of a spikelike structure called an S protein on the surface of the COVID-19 virus.
There are a few main types of COVID-19 vaccines.
An mRNA vaccine gives cells instructions for how to make the S protein found on the surface of the COVID-19 virus. After vaccination, the body's muscle cells begin making the protein pieces and showing them on cell surfaces. This causes the body to create antibodies. Then if you catch the COVID-19 virus, these antibodies are used to help clear out the virus.
Once the protein pieces are made, your cells break down the instructions and get rid of them. The mRNA in the vaccine doesn't enter the nucleus of the cell, where DNA is kept. Both the Pfizer-BioNTech and the Moderna COVID-19 vaccines use mRNA.
In this type of vaccine, material from the virus that causes COVID-19 is placed in a modified version of a different virus. This different virus is called a viral vector. The viral vector gives cells instructions to make copies of the COVID-19 virus S protein.
Once the cells display the S proteins on their surfaces, the immune system responds by creating antibodies and defensive white blood cells. If infection with the virus that causes COVID-19 happens later, the antibodies help clear out the virus.
Viral vector vaccines can't cause infection with the COVID-19 virus or the viral vector virus. The Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine is a vector vaccine that's no longer used in the United States.
Subunit vaccines include only the parts of a virus that best stimulate the immune system. This type of COVID-19 vaccine has harmless S proteins in it. Once the immune system recognizes the S proteins, it creates antibodies and defensive white blood cells. If infection with the COVID-19 virus happens later, the antibodies help clear out the virus.
The Novavax COVID-19 vaccine is a protein subunit vaccine.
The COVID-19 vaccines available in the United States are:
Getting vaccinations as they are updated and on schedule gives you the best protection against COVID-19.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.