Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Pain after surgery often can be treated successfully. Modern pain medicines and anesthesia can control pain and help your body heal.
It's natural to have concerns about the pain you might have after surgery. It's also natural to be concerned about the possible risks of taking powerful pain medicines. Controlling pain and lowering the risk of side effects are important for your comfort, recovery and rehabilitation after surgery.
It's best to talk about pain relief and pain medicines before you have surgery. Being prepared can help you better manage your pain.
Before surgery, you'll likely speak with your surgeon or other members of your healthcare team. You may discuss pain management, treatment options and your particular needs. You might talk about your:
Pain after surgery usually is managed with more than one pain medicine, also known as an analgesic. The right type, delivery and dose of medicines for you depend on the type of surgery and expected recovery, as well as your own needs.
Opioids may or may not be appropriate to use after your surgery. Your surgeon will likely prescribe a combination of treatments. These may help control pain and lessen side effects. A combination of treatments also can help you resume activity appropriate for recovery and lower the risks associated with opioids.
Opioids are often critical for managing pain after surgery because of their powerful effect. But they can have side effects, including nausea, vomiting, constipation, urinary retention, drowsiness, impaired thinking skills and trouble breathing.
Overdosing and misuse of opioids also are risks, especially when opioids are used to treat ongoing pain, known as chronic pain. Although the use of opioids after surgery is intended as a short-term strategy to relieve pain while the body heals, the risk of misuse is still a concern.
Because of the risks, use these medicines carefully, if at all. To lower the risks, take opioids at the smallest dose that is effective for the shortest possible time.
Talk to your healthcare professional about steps you can take to lower the risks associated with opioids, including:
A patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) system allows you to give yourself a dose of intravenous pain medicine, with the push of a button. This system decreases any pain and anxiety you may feel while waiting for medicine.
A patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) system allows you to give yourself a dose of intravenous pain medicine, with the push of a button. This system decreases any pain and anxiety you may feel while waiting for medicine.
In epidural analgesia, pain relievers are injected into the epidural space, which is within the spinal canal but outside the spinal fluid. A long, thin tube called a catheter, inserted between two vertebrae in the back, delivers the medicine.
In epidural analgesia, pain relievers are injected into the epidural space, which is within the spinal canal but outside the spinal fluid. A long, thin tube called a catheter, inserted between two vertebrae in the back, delivers the medicine.
A primary goal of pain management after major surgery is for you to awaken relatively comfortable and to transition to pain control. However, some discomfort is common and should be expected after surgery.
Intravenous (IV) pain medicine.  Before surgery, you'll likely have a slender plastic tube called a catheter inserted into a vein in your hand or arm. The catheter allows your healthcare team to give you fluids, sedatives, anesthetics, antibiotics or pain medicines. The catheter can be used for delivering pain medicines until you can take pills by mouth.
Pain relievers, such as opioids, are usually injected into your IV catheter at regular intervals. Most hospitals also offer patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). PCA is a system that allows you to give yourself a fixed dose of the medicine by pushing a button. This way you don't have to ask a nurse for each dose of pain medicine.
The PCA system has built-in safeguards to prevent you from overdosing on pain medicine. If you push the button more than once within a set period of time, the dispenser ignores the second request.
Spinal anesthesia. Some surgeries can be done with spinal anesthesia, which involves medicines injected directly into the spinal fluid.
Spinal anesthesia is easier and faster than epidural analgesia. But it doesn't last as long because there's no catheter to allow the delivery of more medicine if needed. A long-acting opioid may be added to the spinal medicine to relieve pain for up to 24 hours.
Nerve block. A nerve block uses a local anesthetic to provide targeted pain relief to an area of your body, such as an arm or leg. It prevents pain messages from traveling up the nerve pathway to your brain. Nerve blocks can be used for outpatient procedures or more-involved inpatient surgery.
For pain relief lasting several hours, an injection is used for a nerve block. For longer pain control, a catheter may be inserted for continuous medicine delivery or patient-controlled delivery.
Epidural analgesia. Pain medicines are injected through a catheter inserted into the epidural space within your spinal canal but outside your spinal fluid. An epidural catheter is often used for labor and delivery. It sometimes is used before an operation, such as a cesarean section or major abdominal surgery.
The epidural catheter can be left in place for several days if needed to control pain after surgery. A continuous infusion of pain relievers, including local anesthetics or opioid medicines, can be delivered through the catheter to control pain.
Patient-controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA), similar to PCA, enables you to give yourself a dose of the pain medicine by pushing a button. It, too, has built-in safeguards so that you don't give yourself too much medicine.
After surgery, you're given instructions for general care. This may include rest, applying ice packs, doing rehabilitative exercises and caring for your wound. Ask to have written instructions to bring home with you.
These instructions may be the main way you relieve pain after minor surgery. If you've had major surgery, the instructions help with a more comfortable transition off medicine.
You will likely switch to oral pain medicines before leaving the hospital. You might continue to take them at home to manage pain. You may take a combination of medicines in pill form, which may include:
Be sure you know what active ingredient is in each pain medicine, what the appropriate dose is and how often to take it. Also ask your healthcare team about possible interactions with other medicines. These include cold medicine that you buy from the store, other prescription medicines and supplements.
After surgery, work with your healthcare team to make your recovery as quick and pain-free as possible. Communicate with members of your healthcare team to help them assess and adjust the pain management plan.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.