Your health care provider will likely be able to diagnose mosquito bites simply by looking at them and talking with you about your recent activities.
The inflamed, itchy, painful swelling referred to as skeeter syndrome is sometimes mistaken for a bacterial infection. Skeeter syndrome is the result of an allergic reaction to proteins in mosquito saliva. There's no simple blood test to detect mosquito antibodies in blood. Antibodies are substances the body produces during an allergic reaction.
Mosquito allergy is diagnosed by determining whether the large areas of swelling and itching occurred after mosquito bites.
Most mosquito bites stop itching and heal on their own in a few days. These self-care tips may make you more comfortable.
There are millions of mosquitoes swarming this summer, sucking blood and leaving itchy, red bumps on the skin.
"Their saliva deposits in the skin from where the bite is, and it's causing a reaction to that saliva." Dr. Summer Allen, a Mayo Clinic family physician, says some of the tried-and-true home remedies for treating mosquito bites work well. Calamine lotion, over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream and even a cold compress can ease the itch.
"It's going to soothe and kind of calm down that intense burning and inflammation that they're feeling in their skin."
And, while it's not always easy, it's important to keep the itching to a minimum.
"If they itch it hard enough, or depending on what they use to itch their skin, they can cause a break in their skin. They can develop a bacterial infection."
Although using insect repellent and other prevention tips can reduce your chances of being bit, really, getting at least one skeeter bite this summer is almost inevitable.
"Time takes care of it, and try to do your best not to itch it if you can."
For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jason Howland.
You won't need to see your doctor for a mosquito bite unless you develop a fever or other symptoms that sometimes develop after such bites.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
If you're having signs and symptoms you think might be related to a mosquito bite, some basic questions to ask your doctor include:
If itching is a problem, try a nonprescription, nonsedating antihistamine such as cetirizine (Children's Zyrtec Allergy, Zyrtec Allergy, others).
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.