You may start by seeing your primary care provider. You also may need to see a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. They can diagnose and treat specific phobias.
To diagnose a specific phobia, your health care professional or mental health care professional may:
The best treatment for specific phobias is a form of therapy called exposure therapy. Sometimes your health care professional also may recommend other therapies or medicine. Knowing the cause of a phobia is less important than focusing on how to treat the avoidance behavior that has developed over time.
 The goal of treatment is to improve your quality of life so that you're no longer limited by your phobias. As you learn how to better manage your responses, thoughts and feelings, your anxiety and fear will get lower and no longer control your life. Typically, one specific phobia is treated at a time.
Talking with a mental health professional can help you manage your specific phobia. The most effective treatments are:
Generally, exposure therapy successfully treats specific phobias. But sometimes medicines can reduce the anxiety and panic symptoms you feel from thinking about or being exposed to the object or situation you fear.
Medicines may be used during treatment at first or for short-term use in specific, occasionally encountered situations, such as flying on an airplane, public speaking or going through an MRI procedure.
Ask your doctor or other health care professional to suggest lifestyle and other strategies to help you manage the anxiety caused by specific phobias. For example:
Professional treatment can help you overcome your specific phobia or manage it effectively so you do not become a prisoner to your fears. You also can take some steps on your own:
As a parent, there's a lot you can do to help your child cope with fears. For example:
If your child's fears continue, seem to be extreme and get in the way of daily life, talk with your child's doctor or other health care professional for advice.
If you have a specific phobia, consider getting help, especially if you have children. Although genetics likely plays a role in how specific phobias start, seeing someone else's phobic response over and over again can trigger a specific phobia in children.
By dealing with your own fears, you can teach your child how to face fears and inspire them to take brave actions just like you did.
If you've made the choice to seek help for a specific phobia, you've taken a huge first step. You may start by talking to your doctor or other primary care provider. Depending on your situation, you may be referred to a mental health professional to identify the problem and get proper treatment.
Do not hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Be ready to answer questions to make sure you have time to go over points you want to spend more time on.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.