The glycated hemoglobin test most often diagnoses type 2 diabetes. Also called the A1C test, it reflects the average blood sugar level for the past two to three months. Results mean the following:
If there are no A1C tests or if you have certain conditions that get in the way of A1C test results, your healthcare professional may use the following tests to diagnose diabetes:
Random blood sugar test. Blood sugar values show in milligrams of sugar per deciliter (mg/dL) or millimoles of sugar per liter (mmol/L) of blood. It doesn't matter when you last ate. A level of 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) or higher suggests diabetes. This is most likely if you also have symptoms of diabetes, such as urinating often and being very thirsty.
Fasting blood sugar test. You give a blood sample for testing after not eating overnight. Results are as follows:
Oral glucose tolerance test. This mainly tests the blood sugar of people who are pregnant and those who have cystic fibrosis. You don't eat for a certain amount of time. Then you drink a sugary liquid at your healthcare team's office. You give blood samples over two hours to test blood sugar levels. Results are as follows:
Screening. The American Diabetes Association suggests that all adults age 35 or older have routine tests for type 2 diabetes. Others to be tested include:
If you're diagnosed with diabetes, your healthcare professional may do other tests to see whether you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Treatment depends on which condition you have.
Your healthcare team tests A1C levels at least two times a year and when your treatment changes. Target A1C goals depend on age and other factors. For most people, the American Diabetes Association suggests an A1C level below 7%.
You also have other tests to screen for complications of diabetes and other medical conditions.
Living with type 2 diabetes involves learning about the condition and lifestyle changes. Diabetes education is an important part of managing the condition. Management includes:
These steps make it more likely that blood sugar will stay in a healthy range. And they may help delay or prevent complications.
There's no diabetes diet. But it's good to focus your eating on:
You may see a registered dietitian, who can help you:
Exercise is important to lose weight or stay at a healthy weight. It also helps manage blood sugar. Talk with your healthcare team before starting or changing your exercise program to make sure the activities are safe for you.
Losing weight can help you manage blood sugar levels, cholesterol, triglycerides and blood pressure. If you're overweight, you may see these factors improve after you lose as little as 5% of your body weight. The more weight you lose, the better it is for your health.
Your healthcare professional or dietitian can help you set good weight-loss goals and make lifestyle changes to help you reach them.
Your healthcare team will tell you how often to check your blood sugar level. This is to make sure that your blood sugar stays in the target range. You may, for instance, need to check it once a day and before or after exercise. If you take insulin, you may need to check your blood sugar several times a day.
You can use a small, at-home device called a blood glucose meter. This measures the amount of sugar in a drop of blood. Keep a record to share with your healthcare team.
Continuous glucose monitoring is an electronic system that records blood sugar levels every few minutes from a sensor put under the skin. The sensor most often is in the arm. The system can send results to a mobile device such as a phone. And the system can alert you when levels are too high or too low.
If you can't stay at your target blood sugar level with diet and exercise, your healthcare team may prescribe diabetes medicines that help lower glucose levels. Or you may start insulin therapy. Medicines for type 2 diabetes include the following.
Metformin (Fortamet, Glumetza, others) is most often the first medicine prescribed for type 2 diabetes. It works mainly in two ways. It lowers the amount of glucose the liver makes. And it helps the body use insulin better.
Some people who take metformin, may get B-12 deficiency and may need to take supplements. There are other side effects that may get better over time. Side effects might include:
Sulfonylureas help the body make more insulin. These include glipizide (Glucotrol XL) and glimepiride (Amaryl). Side effects might include:
Another sulfonylurea is glyburide (DiaBeta, Glynase). It has a higher risk of low blood sugar.
Glinides help the pancreas to make more insulin. They work faster than sulfonylureas. But their effect doesn't last as long. They include repaglinide and nateglinide. Side effects might include:
Thiazolidinediones help the body's tissues take in more insulin. These include pioglitazone (Actos) and rosiglitazone. Side effects might include:
DPP-4 inhibitors help lower blood sugar levels. But they tend to have only a small effect. Medicines include alogliptin (Nesina), sitagliptin (Januvia), saxagliptin and linagliptin (Tradjenta). Side effects might include:
GLP-1 receptor agonists are medicines taken by shot, called injection. They slow digestion and help lower blood sugar levels. Their use is often linked with weight loss. Some lower the risk of heart attack and stroke.
These medicines include dulaglutide (Trulicity) exenatide (Byetta, Bydureon Bcise), liraglutide (Saxenda, Victoza) and semaglutide (Rybelsus, Ozempic, Wegovy). Side effects might include:
SGLT2 inhibitors affect the how the kidneys filter blood. They block the return of glucose to the bloodstream. Excess glucose then leaves the body in the urine. These medicines may lower the risk of heart attack and stroke in people with a high risk of those conditions.
These medicines include canagliflozin (Invokana), dapagliflozin (Farxiga) and empagliflozin (Jardiance). Side effects might include:
Other medicines your healthcare professional might prescribe are medicines to lower blood pressure and cholesterol. Low-dose aspirin may help prevent heart and blood vessel conditions.
Some people who have type 2 diabetes need insulin therapy. In the past, people tried insulin therapy only after other treatments had failed. But today, it may be prescribed sooner if lifestyle changes and other medicines don't manage blood sugar levels.
Insulin types vary by how quickly they work and how long they last. Long-acting insulin, for instance, works overnight or throughout the day to keep blood sugar levels even. People most often take short-acting insulin at mealtimes.
Your healthcare professional prescribes the type of insulin that's right for you and advises you when to take it. Your insulin type, dosage and schedule may change. That depends on how stable your blood sugar levels are. People take most types of insulin as an injection.
A side effect of insulin is low blood sugar, called hypoglycemia.
Weight-loss surgery changes the shape of the digestive system and how it works. This surgery may help you lose weight and manage type 2 diabetes and other conditions linked to obesity.
There are a few surgical procedures. All of them help people lose weight by limiting how much food they can eat. Some procedures also limit the amount of nutrients the body can absorb.
Weight-loss surgery is only one part of an overall treatment plan. Treatment also includes diet and nutritional supplements, exercise and mental health care.
Weight-loss surgery may be a choice for adults living with type 2 diabetes who have a body mass index (BMI) of 35 or higher. BMI is a formula that uses weight and height to estimate body fat. Surgery also may be a choice for someone with a BMI lower than 35. This depends on how bad the diabetes is or whether there are other medical conditions.
If you have weight-loss surgery, you need to make lifestyle changes for life. Long-term side effects may include not taking in enough nutrients and the bone-loss condition, osteoporosis.
People who have type 2 diabetes often need to change their treatment plan during pregnancy and follow a diet that controls carbohydrates. Many people need insulin therapy during pregnancy. They also may need to stop other treatments, such as certain blood pressure medicines.
You have a higher risk during pregnancy of getting a condition that affects the eyes, called diabetic retinopathy. This condition may get worse during pregnancy.
If you're pregnant, visit a specialist in eye care, called an ophthalmologist. Go each trimester of your pregnancy and one year after you give birth. Or go as often as your healthcare team advises.
You need to track your blood sugar levels to keep from getting serious complications. Also, know of symptoms that may mean that blood sugar levels need care right away. They include:
High blood sugar. This condition also is called hyperglycemia. Eating certain foods or too much food, being sick, or not taking diabetes medicines at the right time can cause high blood sugar. Symptoms include:
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar nonketotic syndrome. Also called HHNS, this life-threatening condition includes a blood sugar reading higher than 600 mg/dL (33.3 mmol/L). HHNS may be more likely if you have an infection, don't take medicines as prescribed, or take certain steroids or other medicines that cause you to urinate often. Symptoms include:
Diabetic ketoacidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis happens when a lack of insulin results in the body breaking down fat for fuel rather than sugar. This causes a buildup of acids called ketones in the bloodstream.
Triggers of diabetic ketoacidosis include certain illnesses, pregnancy and medicines. The diabetes medicines called SGLT2 inhibitors can increase the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, especially when used in people living with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetic ketoacidosis makes acids that are toxic. So the condition can be life-threatening. Besides the symptoms of hyperglycemia, such as urinating often and more thirst, ketoacidosis may cause:
Low blood sugar. Low blood sugar is when blood sugar levels drop below the target range. This condition also is called hypoglycemia. Your blood sugar level can drop for many reasons. These include missing a meal, taking more medicine than usual or being more physically active than usual. Symptoms include:
If you have symptoms of low blood sugar, drink or eat something that raises your blood sugar level quickly. Try fruit juice, sugared soda, glucose tablets, hard candy or another source of sugar. Retest your blood in 15 minutes.
If levels are not at your target, eat or drink another source of sugar. Eat a meal after your blood sugar level returns to normal.
If you pass out, someone needs to give you a shot of glucagon. This hormone causes the release of sugar into the blood.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Careful management of type 2 diabetes can lower the risk of serious, or even life-threatening complications. Try these tips:
Keep your vaccinations up to date. High blood sugar can weaken your immune system. Get a flu shot every year. Stay current on COVID-19 vaccines. Your healthcare team also may suggest the pneumonia vaccine.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also suggests the hepatitis B vaccination if you haven't had this vaccine and you're 19 to 59 years old. Talk to your healthcare team about other vaccinations you may need.
Watch your feet. Wash your feet daily in lukewarm water. Dry them gently, including between the toes. Use lotion to moisturize them.
Check your feet every day for blisters, cuts, sores, changes in color and swelling. Contact your healthcare team if you have a sore or other foot problem that isn't healing.
Use alcohol sparingly. Drinks with alcohol may lower or raise blood sugar levels. If you choose to drink alcohol, do so only with a meal.
Drink in moderation. That means no more than one drink daily for people assigned female at birth and no more than two drinks daily for people assigned male at birth. Check your blood sugar often after drinking alcohol.
Many alternative medicine treatments claim to help people living with diabetes. The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health says studies haven't shown enough proof for any alternative therapies to manage blood sugar. Research has shown the following results about popular supplements for type 2 diabetes:
Talk with your healthcare team before using a dietary supplement or natural treatment. Don't use alternative medicines in place of your prescribed diabetes medicines.
Type 2 diabetes is a serious disease. Following a diabetes treatment plan can be hard. To manage diabetes well, you may need a good support network.
Anxiety and depression are common in people living with diabetes. Talking to a counselor or therapist may help you cope with the lifestyle changes you need to make and the stress that comes with a type 2 diabetes diagnosis.
Support groups can be good sources of diabetes education, emotional support and helpful information. You might learn how to find local resources or where to find carbohydrate counts for a favorite restaurant. If you want to join a support group, your healthcare team may be able to suggest a group in your area.
Visit the American Diabetes Association website to find local activities and support groups for people with type 2 diabetes. The American Diabetes Association also offers online information and online forums where you can chat with others who are living with diabetes. You also can call the organization at 800-DIABETES (800-342-2383).
Your annual wellness visit can include screening for diabetes. And it can include watching for and treating conditions that raise your risk of diabetes. These include high blood pressure, high cholesterol or a high BMI.
If you have symptoms that may be linked to diabetes, be ready to answer the following questions at your visit:
If you are diagnosed with diabetes, your healthcare professional may begin a treatment plan. Or you may be sent to a specialist in hormonal disorders, called an endocrinologist. Your care team also may include the following specialists:
Talk with your healthcare professional about other specialists you might need.
Anytime you see a member of your treatment team, ask if there's anything you need to do before the appointment. These may include not eating or drinking before a test. Always talk about the following with your healthcare team:
Your healthcare team might ask you questions at your appointments, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.