Often COPD can be hard to diagnose because symptoms can be the same as those of other lung conditions. Many people who have COPD may not be diagnosed until the disease is advanced.
To diagnose your condition, your healthcare professional reviews your symptoms and asks about your family and medical history and any exposure you've had to lung irritants — especially cigarette smoke. Your healthcare professional does a physical exam that includes listening to your lungs. You also may have some of these tests to diagnose your condition: pulmonary function tests, lab tests and imaging.
A spirometer is a diagnostic device that measures the amount of air you can breathe in and out and the time it takes you to breathe out completely after you take a deep breath.
A spirometer is a diagnostic device that measures the amount of air you can breathe in and out and the time it takes you to breathe out completely after you take a deep breath.
Pulmonary function tests are done to find out how well your lungs are working. These tests may include:
Pulmonary function and imaging tests also can be used to check your condition over time and see how treatments are working.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your COPD-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment is based on how severe your symptoms are and whether you often have bouts when symptoms get worse. These bouts are called exacerbations. Effective therapy can control symptoms, slow how fast the condition worsens, lower the risk of complications and improve your ability to lead an active life.
The most essential step in any treatment plan for COPD is to quit all smoking. Stopping smoking can keep COPD from getting worse and making it harder to breathe. But quitting smoking isn't easy, especially if you've tried to quit and haven't been successful.
Talk with your healthcare professional about stop-smoking programs, nicotine replacement products and medicines that might help. Also talk about how to handle relapses. Your healthcare professional may recommend a support group for people who want to quit smoking. Also, stay away from secondhand smoke whenever possible.
Several kinds of medicines are used to treat the symptoms and complications of COPD. You may take some medicines on a regular basis and others as needed.
Most medicines for COPD are given using an inhaler. This small hand-held device delivers the medicine straight to your lungs when you breathe in the fine mist or powder. Talk with your healthcare professional so that you know the right way to use the inhaler prescribed.
Medicine also can be given using a nebulizer. This small machine has a mask or mouthpiece and a hose attached to a round cup for liquid medicine. The nebulizer changes liquid medicine into a mist so it can be breathed into the lungs. Nebulizers also help loosen mucus. You may have one of these types of nebulizers:
Bronchodilators are medicines that usually come in inhalers. Bronchodilators relax the muscles around the airways. This can help relieve coughing and make breathing easier. Depending on how severe your COPD is, you may need a short-acting bronchodilator before activities, a long-acting bronchodilator that you use every day or both.
Examples of short-acting bronchodilators include:
An example of a short-acting bronchodilator combination inhaler is ipratropium bromide-albuterol (Combivent Respimat).
Inhaled corticosteroids, often simply called steroids, can lessen airway inflammation and help prevent bouts when COPD symptoms get worse. Side effects of inhaled steroids may include bruising, mouth infections and hoarseness. These medicines are useful if you often have times when COPD symptoms get worse.
Some combination inhalers include more than one type of bronchodilator. Examples of these include:
Other inhalers combine bronchodilators and inhaled steroids. Examples include:
For times when COPD symptoms get worse, short courses of oral corticosteroids — for example, 3 to 5 days — may prevent more worsening of COPD. Oral corticosteroids are medicines taken by mouth. Long-term use of these oral medicines can have serious side effects, such as weight gain, diabetes, osteoporosis, cataracts and higher risk of infection.
A medicine approved for severe COPD and symptoms of chronic bronchitis is roflumilast (Daliresp), a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor. This medicine lessens airway inflammation and relaxes the airways. Common side effects include nausea, diarrhea and weight loss. Roflumilast is used to prevent exacerbations and lessen how often they happen.
When other treatment has not been effective or if cost is a factor, theophylline (Elixophyllin, Theo-24, Theochron), a less expensive medicine, may help make breathing easier and prevent bouts when symptoms get worse. Side effects depend on the dose and may include nausea and trouble sleeping. Blood tests are commonly used to monitor blood levels of theophylline. Irregular heartbeats and seizures are possible if the blood level is too high.
Respiratory infections, such as acute bronchitis, pneumonia and influenza, can make COPD symptoms worse. Antibiotics may help treat these bouts of worsening COPD symptoms, but they aren't generally recommended to prevent infections. Some studies show that certain antibiotics, such as azithromycin (Zithromax), help prevent COPD exacerbations. But side effects and antibiotic resistance may limit their use.
Oxygen therapy, a pulmonary rehabilitation program and in-home noninvasive ventilation therapy can all help treat COPD.
If there isn't enough oxygen in your blood, you may need supplemental oxygen. You can get this extra oxygen to your lungs through a mask or through plastic tubing with tips that fit into your nose. These attach to an oxygen tank. Lightweight, portable units that you can take with you can help you be more mobile.
Some people with COPD use oxygen only during activities or while sleeping. Others use oxygen all the time. Oxygen therapy can improve quality of life and extend life. Talk with your healthcare professional about your needs and oxygen therapy options.
These programs usually combine health education, exercise training, breathing techniques, nutrition advice and counseling. You work with a variety of specialists who can tailor your rehabilitation program to meet your needs.
Pulmonary rehabilitation after bouts of worsening symptoms may lessen the likelihood that you'll need to go back into the hospital. Pulmonary rehabilitation also allows you to participate more fully in everyday activities and improves your quality of life. Talk with your healthcare professional about attending a program.
This therapy may prevent bouts of worsening symptoms for some people with severe COPD. Research is ongoing to determine the best ways to use this therapy at home.
Evidence supports in-hospital use of breathing devices, such as bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP). BiPAP may help certain people with COPD if used at home during the night. A noninvasive ventilation therapy machine attaches to a mask worn over your mouth and nose. BiPAP helps to make breathing easier and may lessen the likelihood of going back into the hospital. It also lowers how much carbon dioxide is left behind in your lungs when you breathe out. Too much carbon dioxide may lead to acute respiratory failure and the need to be in the hospital.
Even with ongoing treatment, you may have times when symptoms become worse for days or weeks. These are called exacerbations, and they may lead to lung failure if you don't receive treatment right away.
Exacerbations may be caused by a respiratory infection, air pollution or other triggers that worsen irritation and inflammation in the lungs. Whatever the cause, it's important to get medical help right away if you notice a cough that seems worse than usual or a change in the mucus you cough up, or you have a harder time breathing.
When exacerbations happen, you may need medicines such as antibiotics, steroids or both; supplemental oxygen; or treatment in the hospital. Once symptoms get better, your healthcare professional can talk with you about ways to prevent bouts of worsening symptoms in the future. You may need to quit smoking; take inhaled steroids, long-acting bronchodilators or other medicines; get your annual flu vaccine; and avoid air pollution whenever possible.
Surgery is an option for some people with some forms of severe emphysema that aren't helped enough by medicines alone. Surgical options include:
For adults with COPD related to AAT deficiency, treatment options include those used for people with more-common types of COPD. Some people can be treated by also replacing the missing AAT protein. This may prevent further damage to the lungs.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you have COPD, you can take steps to feel better and slow the damage to your lungs:
Living with COPD can be a challenge — especially when it becomes severe and is harder to catch your breath. You may have to give up some activities you used to enjoy. Your family and friends may find they need to adjust to some of these changes too.
It can help to share your feelings with your family, friends, healthcare professional or mental health professional. You may benefit from counseling or medicine if you feel depressed or overwhelmed. Think about joining a support group for people with COPD.
If your primary healthcare professional thinks that you have COPD, you'll likely be referred to a doctor who specializes in lung conditions, called a pulmonologist.
You might want to take a friend or family member with you to the appointment to help you remember information.
Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your healthcare professional may ask you questions, such as:
Be ready to answer questions so that you have time to talk about what's most important to you.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.