Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Caffeine may cause a brief rise in your blood pressure, even if you don't have high blood pressure. This short-term spike in blood pressure happens mainly in people who don't drink caffeine often, rather than in those who do. Still, the blood pressure response to caffeine differs from person to person.
It's not clear why caffeine causes some people's blood pressure to briefly rise. Some researchers think that caffeine could block a hormone that helps keep the arteries widened. Others think that caffeine causes the adrenal glands to release more adrenaline, which causes blood pressure to go up. Stress also might play a role.
People who regularly drink caffeine develop a tolerance to caffeine. As a result, caffeine doesn't have a long-term effect on blood pressure and is not linked with a higher risk of high blood pressure, also called hypertension.
If you have high blood pressure, you likely do not need to limit or stop drinking caffeine if you drink it regularly. But ask your healthcare professional to be sure.
If you don't have high blood pressure, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration says 400 milligrams (mg) a day of caffeine tends to be safe for most adults. But your genes determine how your body breaks down caffeine. So some people can drink more than 400 mg a day and some can drink less before they get side effects. These side effects include:
Keep in mind that the amount of caffeine in coffee, energy drinks and other beverages varies by brand and by the way the drink is prepared.
To see if caffeine might be raising your blood pressure, check your blood pressure before drinking a cup of coffee or other caffeinated beverage and again 30 to 120 minutes afterward. If you don't drink coffee regularly and your blood pressure increases by about 5 to 10 points, you may be sensitive to the blood pressure raising effects of caffeine. If you plan to cut back on caffeine, do so over a few days to a week to prevent headaches from caffeine withdrawal.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.