During the physical exam, your healthcare professional may:
If imaging test results do not provide enough information, you may need an arthroscopy. This procedure uses a pencil-sized instrument called an arthroscope. The arthroscope is inserted into the wrist through a small incision in the skin. The instrument contains a light and a tiny camera, which projects images onto a television monitor. Arthroscopy is considered the gold standard for evaluating long-term wrist pain. In some cases, an orthopedic surgeon may repair wrist problems through the arthroscope.
Your healthcare professional might order an electromyogram (EMG) if carpal tunnel syndrome is suspected. The EMG test measures the tiny electrical discharges produced in the muscles. A needle-thin electrode is inserted into the muscle, and its electrical activity is recorded when the muscle is at rest and when it's contracted. Nerve conduction studies also are performed to check whether the electrical impulses are slowed in the region of the carpal tunnel.
Treatments for wrist problems vary greatly based on the type, location and severity of the injury. Your age and overall health also may play a role in treatment.
Nonprescription pain relievers, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), may help reduce wrist pain. Stronger pain relievers are available by prescription. Injections of corticosteroid medicine also may be considered for some conditions.
A physical therapist can implement specific treatments and exercises for wrist injuries and tendon problems. If you need surgery, your physical therapist can help with rehabilitation after the operation. You may benefit from having an ergonomic evaluation to talk about workplace factors that may be contributing to wrist pain.
If you have a broken bone in your wrist, the pieces typically need to be aligned so that the bone can heal properly. A cast or splint can help hold the bone fragments together while they heal.
If you have sprained or strained your wrist, you may need to wear a splint to protect the injured tendon or ligament while it heals. Splints are particularly helpful with overuse injuries caused by repetitive motions.
In some cases, surgery may be necessary. Examples include:
Wrist pain doesn't always require medical treatment. For a minor wrist injury, apply ice and wrap your wrist with an elastic bandage.
Although you may first consult your family healthcare professional, they may refer you to a specialist. You may see an orthopedic surgeon, a physical medicine and rehabilitation expert, or a healthcare professional specializing in sports medicine. If arthritis is suspected, you may be referred to a specialist in joint disorders called a rheumatologist.
You may want to write a list that includes:
Your healthcare team may ask some of the following questions:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.