Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Belching, gas and bloating can be embarrassing and uncomfortable. Here's what causes these signs and symptoms — and how you can minimize them.
Belching or passing gas, also called flatus, is natural and common. Excessive belching or flatus, along with bloating, pain or swelling of the belly, can sometimes interfere with daily activities or cause embarrassment. But these symptoms usually don't point to a serious underlying condition and are often reduced with simple lifestyle changes.
When belching, gas or bloating interferes with your daily activities, there may be something wrong. Find out how to reduce or avoid gas and gas pains, and when you may need to see a healthcare professional.
Belching is commonly known as burping. It's your body's way of pushing out excess air from your upper digestive tract. Most belching is caused by swallowing excess air. This air most often never even reaches the stomach. Instead, it builds up in the esophagus.
You may swallow excess air if you eat or drink too fast, talk while you eat, chew gum, suck on hard candies, drink carbonated beverages, or smoke. Some people swallow air as a nervous habit even when they're not eating or drinking.
Acid reflux or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) can sometimes cause excessive belching by promoting increased swallowing.
Belching often also may be related to inflammation of the stomach lining or to an infection with Helicobacter pylori, the bacterium responsible for some stomach ulcers. In these cases, the belching is accompanied by other symptoms, such as heartburn or stomach pain.
Gas in the small intestine or colon is usually caused by the digestion or fermentation of undigested food by bacteria found in the bowel. Gas also can form when your digestive system doesn't completely break down certain components in foods, such as gluten, found in most grains, or the sugar in dairy products and fruit.
Other sources of intestinal gas may include:
Try an over the counter remedy. Some products such as Lactaid or Dairy Ease can help digest lactose. Products containing simethicone (Gas-X, Mylanta Gas, others) haven't been proved to be helpful, but many people feel that these products work.
Products such as Beano, particularly the liquid form, may decrease the gas produced during the breakdown of certain types of beans.
Bloating is a sensation of having a full stomach. Distension is a visible or measurable increase in belly size. People often describe stomach symptoms as bloating, especially if those symptoms don't seem to be relieved by belching, passing gas or having a bowel movement.
The exact connection between intestinal gas and bloating is not fully understood. Many people with bloating symptoms don't have any more gas in the intestine than do other people. Many people, particularly those with irritable bowel syndrome or anxiety, may just have a greater sensitivity to stomach symptoms and intestinal gas.
Nonetheless, bloating may be relieved by the behavioral changes that reduce belching, or the dietary changes that reduce flatus.
Excessive belching, passing gas and bloating often resolve on their own or with simple changes. If these are the only symptoms you have, they rarely represent any serious underlying condition.
Consult a healthcare professional if your symptoms don't improve with simple changes, particularly if you also notice:
These symptoms could signal an underlying digestive condition. Intestinal symptoms can be embarrassing — but don't let embarrassment keep you from seeking help.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.