Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A fever is a rise in body temperature. It's often a sign of infection. Fever itself most often is harmless and it may play a role in fighting infection. Most fevers don't need treatment.
The average body temperature is 98.6 Fahrenheit (37 Celsius). But typical body temperature can range between 97 F (36.1 C) and 99 F (37.2 C) or more. Your body temperature can vary by how active you are, your age or the time of day. Most often, older people have lower body temperatures than younger people have.
These thermometer readings are thought to be a fever:
For a baby who's less than 3 months old and has a fever, get medical help right away.
Also, seek emergency medical care for a child who has any of these symptoms after being left in a hot car. These may be symptoms of a heat-related illness.
The main goal of treatment is to improve comfort and help you or your child rest.
Children with fevers may not look or act sick. Treating a fever depends on how uncomfortable they are. If your child is uncomfortable or restless, these home care strategies may help:
Adults with fevers of 103 F (39.4 C) or higher will most often look and act sick. To treat a fever:
Seek medical care if a child of any age shows any of the following:
Seek medical care for an adult with a fever and any of the following:
Always use a digital thermometer to check someone's temperature. Types you can get include:
Because of the dangers of being exposed to mercury, don't use a glass mercury thermometer.
No matter which type of thermometer you use, do the following when using it:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.