A healthcare professional can often diagnose an ear infection based on symptoms and an exam. The exam likely includes looking inside the child's ears with a lighted instrument known as an otoscope. If the eardrum is red and bulging, there's likely an infection.
Other tests might be needed if there's doubt about a diagnosis, if the condition hasn't gotten better with treatment or if there are other issues.
Many children's ear infections clear up without antibiotics. Treatment depends on the person's age and how bad the symptoms are.
Symptoms of ear infections usually get better in a couple of days. Most ear infections clear up in a week or two without treatment. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Academy of Family Physicians recommend a wait-and-see approach as one choice for:
Easing pain from an ear infection might involve:
Pain medicine that you can get without a prescription. These include acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others). Follow label directions.
Use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 3, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This is because aspirin has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition, in such children.
Antibiotics might be helpful for some children and for adults with ear infections. But using antibiotics too often can cause the medicine to not work as well against the bacteria. Talk to your child's healthcare professional about the pros and cons of using antibiotics.
Usually after a watch-and-wait time, a healthcare professional might suggest using an antibiotic for an ear infection for:
Children younger than 6 months who have acute otitis media are more likely to be treated with antibiotics without the watch-and-wait time.
It's important to take the antibiotic as directed even after symptoms improve. Not taking all the medicine can cause the infection to return. Talk to a healthcare professional or pharmacist about what to do after missing a dose.
Ear tubes drain fluid from the middle ear. Ear tubes might help children who have repeated, long-lasting ear infections, also known as chronic otitis media. Ear tubes also might help children who have fluid buildup in the ear after an infection cleared up, known as otitis media with effusion.
The tubes are placed during an outpatient surgery called a myringotomy. A surgeon makes a tiny hole in the eardrum to suction fluids out of the middle ear. The surgeon then puts the ear tube in the opening to help air get to the middle ear and to prevent the buildup of more fluids.
Young children will likely be given medicine to put them to sleep for the surgery, also known as general anesthesia.
Some tubes stay in place for 6 months to 2 years. They fall out on their own. Other tubes are meant to stay in longer. They might need to be removed with another surgery.
The hole in the eardrum usually closes again after the tube falls out.

      Ear tubes, also called tympanostomy tubes, ventilation tubes or pressure equalization tubes, are tiny. They're usually made of plastic or metal. They're placed into the eardrum during surgery. An ear tube makes an airway that keeps fluid from building up behind the eardrum.
      
Chronic infection that causes a tear in the eardrum, called chronic suppurative otitis media, is hard to treat. Antibiotics drops put into the ear might treat the condition. You might get directions on how to suction fluids out through the ear canal before putting in the drops.
Children who have infections often or who always have fluid in the middle ear will need to be watched. Talk to your child's healthcare professional about how often to schedule follow-up appointments. Follow-up might include regular hearing and language tests.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
You'll likely see your family healthcare professional. You may be referred to a specialist in ear, nose and throat (ENT) conditions.
You or your child can answer the questions a healthcare professional is likely to ask. These might include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.