Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Vitamin D is a nutrient the body needs, along with calcium, to build bones and keep them healthy. The body can absorb calcium only if it has enough vitamin D. Calcium is a major part of bones.
Vitamin D also has many other uses in the body. It supports immune health and helps keep muscles and brain cells working.
Vitamin D isn't in many foods unless it's added. It's added to fortified milk and cereal. And it's in fish such as salmon, mackerel, and sardines. The body also makes vitamin D from direct sunlight on the skin.
How much vitamin D the body makes depends on many things. These include the time of day you're in the sun, what season it is, where you live, and the color of your skin. Depending on where you live and your lifestyle, you might get little to no vitamin D from the sun during winter. Although you need sunscreen to prevent skin cancer, using it also can lessen how much vitamin D your body makes.
Many older adults don't get enough direct sunlight. They also may have trouble taking in vitamin D. Other people who may not get enough vitamin D are breastfed babies, people with Black or brown skin, and people who have obesity or have had gastric bypass surgery. People with conditions that affect how the body absorbs fat, such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, also may not get enough vitamin D.
If you think you don't get enough vitamin D, talk with your healthcare professional. A simple blood test can check the levels of this vitamin in your blood.
Taking a vitamin D supplement or a multivitamin with vitamin D may help improve bone health. The recommended daily amount of vitamin D is 400 international units (IU) for children up to age 12 months, 600 IU for people ages 1 to 70 years, and 800 IU for people over 70 years.
Research on vitamin D use for certain conditions shows:
Without vitamin D, bones can become soft, thin and brittle. Not having enough vitamin D also is linked to the bone-thinning condition osteoporosis. People who don't get enough vitamin D from sunlight or diet may need vitamin D supplements.
Taken in typical doses, vitamin D is thought to be mainly safe.
But taking too much vitamin D in the form of supplements can be harmful and even deadly. Taking more than 4,000 IU a day of vitamin D might cause:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.