During the physical exam, a healthcare professional might check muscle strength and reflexes. For example, you may be asked to walk on your toes or heels, rise from a squatting position, and lift your legs one at a time while lying on your back.
People with severe pain or pain that doesn't improve within a few weeks may need:
For pain that doesn't improve with self-care measures, some of the following treatments might help.
The types of medicines that might be used to treat sciatica pain include:
Once the pain improves, a healthcare professional can design a program to help prevent future injuries. This typically includes exercises to correct posture, strengthen the core and improve range of motion.
In some cases, a shot of a corticosteroid medication into the area around the nerve root that's causing pain can help. Often, one injection helps reduce pain. Up to three can be given in one year.
Surgeons can remove the bone spur or the portion of the herniated disk that's pressing on the nerve. But surgery is usually done only when sciatica causes severe weakness, loss of bowel or bladder control, or pain that doesn't improve with other treatments.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
For most people, sciatica responds to self-care measures. Although resting for a day or so may provide relief, staying inactive will make symptoms worse.
Other self-care treatments that might help include:
Alternative therapies often used for low back pain include:
Not everyone who has sciatica needs medical care. If your symptoms are serious or last for more than a month, make an appointment with your healthcare professional.
For radiating low back pain, some basic questions to ask include:
Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.