Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
If you bruise easily, you might wonder what's causing it and what you can do. Learn more and understand when bruising could signal a serious concern.
Yet another bruise. You don't remember bumping into anything, but lately you seem to be bruising often. Should you be worried?
Easy bruising is common with age. Most bruises are harmless and go away without treatment. However, easy bruising can sometimes be a sign of a more serious health condition.
Most bruises form when small blood vessels, called capillaries, near the skin's surface are broken by the impact of a blow or injury. This often happens on the arms or legs. Blood then leaks out of the vessels. At first, the blood looks like a dark mark. Over time the body reabsorbs the blood, and the mark disappears.
Generally, harder blows cause larger bruises. But if you bruise easily, even a small bump may cause a large bruise.
Some people tend to bruise more easily than others. And as people get older, the skin becomes thinner. It also loses some of the protective fatty layer that helps cushion blood vessels from injury.
Some medicines may lead to easy bruising by lowering the blood's ability to clot. Examples include:
Some antibiotics and antidepressants also may cause problems with blood clotting. In people who take medicine that lowers the blood's ability to clot, bleeding from damage to small blood vessels near the skin's surface might take longer than usual to stop. This allows enough blood to leak out under the skin to cause a bruise. 
Medicines called corticosteroids thin the skin, and that makes it easier to bruise too. Certain dietary supplements, such as ginkgo biloba, also can raise the risk of bruising due to a blood-thinning effect.
If you notice that you're bruising easily, don't stop taking your medicines. Talk with your healthcare professional about your concerns. Also, tell your healthcare professional about any supplements you take. That's especially important if you're taking a supplement when you're also taking a blood-thinning medicine. Your healthcare professional might tell you not to take certain supplements or other medicines that you can buy without a prescription.
Easy bruising sometimes may be a symptom of a serious health issue, such as a blood-clotting condition or a blood disease. See your healthcare professional if you:
Health concerns that may be linked to easy bruising include:
Another serious cause of bruising is domestic violence or abuse. If someone has a bruise that can't be explained, especially in an unusual location such as on the face, be aware of the possibility of abuse.
To find the cause of bruising, your healthcare professional likely will do a physical exam and ask questions about your symptoms and medical history. You also may have your blood platelet levels checked or have tests that measure the time it takes your blood to clot.
To prevent minor bruising, take steps to avoiding falls and injuries:
Once a bruise has formed, not much can be done to treat it. Most bruises go away over time as the body absorbs the blood. But healing might take longer as you age. As a bruise heals, it might help to raise the area that's bruised and put ice on it.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.