Your healthcare professional will likely be able to diagnose cellulitis by looking at your skin. You might need to have blood tests or other tests to help rule out other conditions. 
Cellulitis treatment usually includes a prescription antibiotic medicine taken by mouth. You take it for as long as your healthcare professional directs, usually 5 to 10 days, even after you feel better. Symptoms typically disappear a few days after you start treatment.
You may need to be hospitalized and receive medicine through your veins if:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Try these steps to help ease any pain and swelling:
You're likely to start by seeing your primary health professional, who may refer you to a doctor who specializes in skin disorders. This type of doctor is a dermatologist. If you have a serious infection, an emergency room healthcare professional may examine you first. You also may be referred to an infectious disease specialist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Preparing a list of questions can help you make sure that you cover the points that are important to you. For cellulitis, some basic questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
Don't hesitate to ask other questions you have.
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions such as:
You may need a prescription antibiotic to clear your infection. However, until you see your healthcare professional, you can wash the injured area with soap and water and place a cool, damp cloth over it.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.