Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Hypothermia happens when the body loses heat faster than it can produce heat and the body temperature falls below 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees Celsius). Left untreated, it can be life-threatening.
Hypothermia is often caused by exposure to cold weather or immersion in cold water. Ongoing exposure to cool indoor temperatures also can cause hypothermia, especially in older adults and babies. Being exhausted or dehydrated increases the risk of hypothermia.
If you suspect someone has hypothermia, call 911 or your local emergency number.
Symptoms of hypothermia usually develop slowly and may include:
To help someone with hypothermia, take these steps immediately:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.