An EEG records the electrical activity of the brain through electrodes put on the scalp. EEG results show changes in brain activity. This may help diagnose brain conditions such as epilepsy and other seizure conditions.
An EEG records the electrical activity of the brain through electrodes put on the scalp. EEG results show changes in brain activity. This may help diagnose brain conditions such as epilepsy and other seizure conditions.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) is a test that measures electrical activity in the brain. This test also is called an EEG. The test uses small, metal discs called electrodes that attach to the scalp. Brain cells communicate via electrical impulses, and this activity shows up as wavy lines on an EEG recording. Brain cells are active all the time, even during sleep.
 An EEG is one of the main tests to help diagnose epilepsy. An EEG also can play a role in diagnosing other brain conditions.
An EEG can find changes in brain activity that might aid in diagnosing brain conditions, especially epilepsy or another seizure condition. An EEG also might be helpful for diagnosing or treating:
An EEG also might be used to confirm brain death in someone in a coma. A continuous EEG is used to help find the right level of anesthesia for someone in a medically induced coma.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
EEGs are safe and painless. Sometimes seizures are intentionally triggered in people with epilepsy during the test, but appropriate medical care is provided if needed.
Take your usual medicines unless your care team tells you not to take them.
During an EEG, flat metal discs called electrodes are attached to the scalp. In a high-density EEG, shown here, the electrodes are close together. The electrodes are connected to the EEG machine with wires. Some people wear an elastic cap fitted with electrodes instead of having the adhesive applied to their scalps.
During an EEG, flat metal discs called electrodes are attached to the scalp. In a high-density EEG, shown here, the electrodes are close together. The electrodes are connected to the EEG machine with wires. Some people wear an elastic cap fitted with electrodes instead of having the adhesive applied to their scalps.
You feel little or no discomfort during an EEG. The electrodes don't transmit any sensations. They just record your brain waves.
Here are some things you can expect to happen during an EEG:
A technician attaches discs called electrodes to your scalp using an adhesive. Sometimes, an elastic cap fitted with electrodes is used instead. The electrodes are connected with wires to an instrument that amplifies the brain waves and records them on computer equipment.
Once the electrodes are in place, an EEG typically takes between 20 and 40 minutes. For certain conditions, you need to sleep during the test. Tests that require you to sleep can be longer.
An ambulatory EEG, also known as an aEEG, allows for longer monitoring outside an office or a hospital setting. But this type of EEG isn't always an option. This test can record brain activity over several days, which increases the chances of recording during seizure activity. However, compared with inpatient video EEG monitoring, an ambulatory EEG is not as good at determining the difference between epileptic seizures and nonepileptic seizures.
The technician removes the electrodes or cap. If you didn't have a sedative, you typically feel no side effects after the procedure. You usually can return to your typical routine.
If you used a sedative, it takes time for the medicine to begin to wear off. Arrange to have someone drive you home. Once you're at home, rest and don't drive for the rest of the day.
Doctors trained to analyze EEGs interpret the recording and send the results to the healthcare professional who ordered the EEG. You might need to schedule an office appointment to discuss the results of the test.
If possible, bring along a family member or friend to the appointment to help you remember the information you're given.
Write down questions to ask your healthcare professional, such as:

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    
Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.
Study shows advanced imaging, expert review improve diagnosis of encephaloceles The sound of a basketball bouncing, the squeak of shoes on a fast break, the swish of the net — basketball has been a constant for Parker Shanks — from youth leagues to high school and college teams, to pickup games at his local gym. One day on the court in 2022, a seizure dropped 6-foot-8-inch Parker to the floor. Watch: Back to basketball after…
When Cadence Rohrbaugh sent out invitations to her high school graduation party earlier this year, she tucked personal notes into a few special envelopes. "Dear Dr. Wirrell," Cadence wrote in one. "Thank you so much for helping me and my family through one of the most difficult times ever. Without your care, I would not be alive, healthy and graduating with honors." Fifteen years earlier, Elaine Wirrell, M.D., had been part of a team that cared…
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.