Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Your menstrual cycle can say a lot about your health. Understand how to track your menstrual cycle and what to do about irregularities.
Do you know when your last menstrual period began or how long it lasted? If not, it might be time to start paying attention.
Keeping track of your menstrual cycles can help you understand what's typical for you. You also can record your ovulation and find important changes — such as a missed period or menstrual bleeding that isn't typical. While irregularities in your period usually aren't serious, sometimes they are caused by other health problems.
The menstrual cycle is the monthly series of changes the body goes through to prepare for pregnancy. Each month, one of the ovaries releases an egg. This is called ovulation. Hormonal changes at this time get the uterus ready for pregnancy. If the released egg isn't fertilized during ovulation, the lining of the uterus sheds through the vagina. This is a menstrual period.
The menstrual cycle is counted from the first day of one period to the first day of the next. The cycle isn't the same for everyone. Menstrual bleeding might happen every 21 to 35 days and last 2 to 7 days. For the first few years after menstruation begins, long cycles are common. However, menstrual cycles tend to shorten and become more regular as people age.
Your menstrual cycle might be regular — about the same length every month — or somewhat irregular. Your period might be light or heavy, painful or pain-free, long or short, and still be considered typical. Within a broad range, "typical" is what's typical for you. 
Certain kinds of birth control, such as extended-cycle birth control pills and intrauterine devices (IUDs), will change a menstrual cycle. Talk to your health care provider about what to expect. 
When you get close to the time when your menstrual cycles will end, called menopause, your cycle might become irregular again. However, the risk of cancer of the uterus gets higher as you age. Talk with your health care provider about any irregular bleeding around menopause. 
To find out what's typical for you, start keeping a record of your menstrual cycle on a calendar. Begin by tracking your start date every month for several months in a row to identify the regularity of your periods.
If you're worried about your periods, also track the following every month: 
Menstrual cycle irregularities can have many different causes, including:
Sometimes, birth control pills can help make an irregular menstrual cycle more regular. Birth control devices that contain progestin can make periods less heavy and ease cramping. Treatment for any problems that may cause these irregularities, such as an eating disorder, also might help. However, some menstrual irregularities can't be prevented.
In addition, talk with your health care provider if:
Remember, keeping track of your period can help you find out what's typical for you and what isn't. If you have questions or concerns about your menstrual cycle, talk to your health care provider.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more.  Click to view a preview and subscribe below.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.