Cholera is a disease that is caused by bacteria. Most often, it spreads through water that's been tainted with bacteria. It also can spread through tainted food. Cholera can cause serious diarrhea and dehydration. Without treatment, the disease can be fatal within hours, even in people who were healthy.
Modern sewage and water treatment have nearly gotten rid of cholera in developed countries. But cholera still exists in parts of Africa, South and Southeast Asia, and Latin America. The risk of a cholera outbreak is highest when poverty, war or natural disasters affect people. These situations can force people to live in crowded spaces that lack sanitation.
Cholera is easily treated. Death from serious dehydration can be prevented with a simple and low-cost rehydration solution.
Most people exposed to the bacteria that cause cholera don't become ill and don't know they've been infected. But they can still infect others if their stool contaminates water or food.
When cholera causes symptoms, most often it leads to mild or moderate loose stools, called diarrhea. This is often hard to tell apart from diarrhea caused by other conditions. Other people develop more-serious symptoms of cholera, most often within a few days of infection.
Symptoms of cholera infection can include:
Dehydration. Dehydration can develop within hours after cholera symptoms start. It can range from mild to serious. A loss of 10% or more of body weight suggests serious dehydration.
Symptoms of cholera dehydration include irritable behavior, fatigue, sunken eyes, a dry mouth, extreme thirst, and little or no urinating. Skin may become dry, shriveled and slow to bounce back when pinched into a fold. Low blood pressure and an irregular heartbeat also can be symptoms.
Dehydration can lead to a rapid loss of minerals in your blood called electrolytes. These minerals maintain the balance of fluids in your body. When you lose too many, it's called an electrolyte imbalance.
An electrolyte imbalance can lead to serious symptoms such as: 
The risk of cholera is slight in developed nations. Even in areas where it exists, you're not likely to become infected if you follow food safety recommendations. Still, cases of cholera occur throughout the world. If you get serious diarrhea after you visit an area with active cholera, see your healthcare professional.
If you have diarrhea, especially bad diarrhea, and think you might have been exposed to cholera, seek treatment right away. Serious dehydration is a medical emergency that needs urgent care.
A type of bacteria called Vibrio cholerae causes cholera infection. The deadly effects of the disease are the result of a toxin the bacteria make in the small intestine. The toxin causes the body to purge huge amounts of water. This leads to diarrhea and a rapid loss of fluids and salts.
Cholera bacteria might not cause illness in all people who are exposed to them. But infected people still pass the bacteria in their stool, which can taint food and water supplies.
Tainted water supplies are the main source of cholera infection. The bacteria can be found in:
Everyone is prone to cholera. But illness is not common before the age of 2. Babies might get protection from the disease when they breastfeed from mothers who've had cholera in the past.
Still, certain factors can make you more likely to get the disease or have serious symptoms. Risk factors for cholera include:
Less or no stomach acid. Cholera bacteria can't survive in an acidic environment. Ordinary stomach acid often serves as a defense against infection.
But people with low levels of stomach acid lack this protection, so they're at greater risk of cholera. Those at risk include children, older adults and people who take medicine to lower stomach acid. These medicines include antacids, H-2 blockers or proton pump inhibitor medicines. People with a condition in which the body's digestive juices lack stomach acid also are at risk. This condition is called achlorhydria.
Cholera can quickly become fatal. Sometimes, the rapid loss of large amounts of fluids and electrolytes can lead to death within hours. Even in less extreme situations, the illness can be life-threatening without treatment. People who don't receive treatment can die of dehydration and shock hours to days after cholera symptoms first appear.
Shock and serious dehydration are the worst complications of cholera. But other conditions can occur, such as: 
Cholera is rare in the United States and other developed countries. In these places, the disease is sometimes linked with travel abroad. Or it can be linked with seafood from waters that harbor cholera bacteria, such as those off the Gulf Coast.
If you travel to areas known to have cholera, take the following safety measures. They can keep your risk of the disease very low:
Drink only safe water, including bottled water or water you've boiled or disinfected yourself. Use bottled water even to brush your teeth.
Most often, hot drinks are safe. So are canned or bottled drinks, but wipe the outside before you open them. And check to see that the seal isn't broken. Don't add ice to your drinks unless you made it yourself using safe water.
People who travel from the United States to areas affected by cholera can get a cholera vaccine called Vaxchora. It's suggested for people ages 2 to 64 who plan to travel where cholera is being spread or regularly spreads. It is a liquid dose taken by mouth at least 10 days before travel.
Many other countries offer vaccines taken by mouth as well. Contact your healthcare professional or local office of public health for more information about these vaccines. Even with the vaccine, it's important to take the above safety measures to prevent cholera.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.