If you have unusual urges to urinate, your healthcare professional checks for an infection or blood in your urine. Your health professional also may check to see if you're emptying your bladder all the way when you urinate.
Your health professional may suggest tests to see how well your bladder works and whether it can empty all the way, called urodynamic tests. A specialist most often does these tests. But testing may not be needed to make a diagnosis or begin treatment.
Measuring urine left in the bladder. This test is important if you might not be emptying your bladder all the way when you urinate. Remaining urine in the bladder, called postvoid residual urine, can cause symptoms like those of an overactive bladder.
To measure residual urine after you void, your health professional may want an ultrasound scan of your bladder. The ultrasound scan translates sound waves into an image. The image shows how much urine is left in your bladder after you urinate.
Sometimes, a thin tube, called a catheter, is passed through the urethra and into your bladder to drain the remaining urine. Then the urine can be measured.
Testing bladder pressures. A test called cystometry measures pressure in your bladder and in the area around it as your bladder fills. After emptying your bladder with a thin tube called a catheter, your health professional uses another catheter to fill your bladder slowly with warm fluid.
Another catheter with a sensor that measures pressure goes into the rectum or the vagina. The sensor tells how much pressure your bladder uses to empty all the way.
This procedure can show how full your bladder is when you start needing to urinate. It also can show whether your bladder tightens when it's not supposed to.
Your health provider reviews the results of your tests with you and suggests a treatment plan.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your overactive bladder-related health concerns
					Start Here


A mix of treatments may be best to relieve overactive bladder symptoms.
The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic organs. Those organs include the uterus, bladder and rectum. Kegel exercises can help strengthen the pelvic floor muscles.
The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic organs. Those organs include the uterus, bladder and rectum. Kegel exercises can help strengthen the pelvic floor muscles.
The male pelvic floor muscles support the bladder and bowel and affect sexual function. Kegel exercises can help strengthen these muscles.
The male pelvic floor muscles support the bladder and bowel and affect sexual function. Kegel exercises can help strengthen these muscles.
Behavioral therapies are the first choice in helping manage an overactive bladder. They often work and have no side effects. Behavioral therapies may include:
Pelvic floor muscle exercises. Kegel exercises strengthen your pelvic floor muscles and urinary sphincter. Stronger muscles can help you stop the bladder from contracting on its own.
Your healthcare professional or a physical therapist can help you learn to do Kegel exercises. Kegel exercises are like other types of exercise. How well they work depends on your doing them regularly. It can take six weeks before they start to work.
After menopause, vaginal estrogen therapy can help strengthen the muscles and tissues in the urethra and vaginal area. Vaginal estrogen comes in creams, suppositories, tablets or rings. It can improve symptoms of overactive bladder.
Medicines that relax the bladder can help relieve symptoms of overactive bladder and reduce episodes of urge incontinence. These drugs include:
Common side effects of most of these drugs include dry eyes and dry mouth. But drinking water for thirst can make symptoms of overactive bladder worse. Constipation is another possible side effect that can make bladder symptoms worse. Extended-release forms of these medicines, including the skin patch or gel, may cause fewer side effects.
Your healthcare professional may suggest that you sip small amounts of water or suck on a piece of sugar-free candy or chew sugar-free gum to relieve dry mouth. You might use eyedrops to keep your eyes moist.
Medicines available without a prescription, such mouthwashes designed to relieve dry mouth, can be helpful for long-term dry mouth. Eating a fiber-rich diet or using stool softeners might help prevent constipation.
OnabotulinumtoxinA (ON-ah-boch-yoo-lih-num-tox-in-A), also called Botox, is a protein from the bacteria that cause botulism illness. Small doses shot into bladder tissues can relax the muscles and increase the amount of urine the bladder can hold.
Studies show that Botox may help severe urge incontinence. The effects most often last six months or more. When the effects wear off, you need another shot.
Side effects from these shots include urinary tract infections and retaining urine. If you're thinking of Botox treatments, you must be willing to put a catheter in yourself if you start retaining urine.
During sacral nerve stimulation, a surgically implanted device delivers electrical impulses to the nerves that regulate bladder activity. These are called the sacral nerves. The unit is placed under the skin in the lower back, about where the back pocket is on a pair of pants. In this image, the device is shown out of place to allow a better view of the unit.
During sacral nerve stimulation, a surgically implanted device delivers electrical impulses to the nerves that regulate bladder activity. These are called the sacral nerves. The unit is placed under the skin in the lower back, about where the back pocket is on a pair of pants. In this image, the device is shown out of place to allow a better view of the unit.
Mild electrical pulses to the bladder nerves can improve overactive bladder symptoms.
One procedure uses a thin wire placed near the sacral nerves where they pass near your tailbone. The sacral nerves carry signals to your bladder.
This minimally invasive procedure is often done with a trial of a wire put under the skin in your lower back. Your healthcare professional then uses a hand-held device attached to the wire to send electrical impulses to your bladder. This is like what a pacemaker does for the heart.
If the trial helps your symptoms, a battery-powered pulse generator is put in with surgery. The device stays in your body to help control the nerves.
This procedure uses a thin needle that is put through the skin near the ankle. It sends electrical stimulation from a nerve in the leg, called the tibial nerve, to the spine. There it connects with the nerves that control the bladder.
PTNS treatments are given once a week for 12 weeks to treat symptoms of overactive bladder. After that, treatments every 3 to 4 weeks help keep symptoms under control.
Surgery to treat overactive bladder is only for people with severe symptoms who don't respond to other treatments. The goal is to improve the bladder's ability to store urine and reduce pressure in the bladder.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
The following might reduce overactive bladder symptoms:
No complementary or alternative therapies have been proved to treat overactive bladder.
Some research suggests that acupuncture might help ease the symptoms of overactive bladder. Acupuncture involves using very thin needles that are thrown out after the procedure. More study is needed.
Complementary treatments may not be covered by insurance. So check with your insurance company if you want to try one.
Living with overactive bladder can be hard. Consumer education and advocacy support groups such as the National Association for Continence can provide you with online resources and information. These groups connect you with other people who have overactive bladder and urge incontinence. Support groups offer the chance to talk about your worries and learn new ways to cope.
Teaching your family and friends about overactive bladder and how it affects you may help you create your own support network and reduce feelings of shame. Once you start talking about it, you may be surprised to learn how common this condition really is.
For overactive bladder, start by seeing your primary healthcare professional. You might then be sent to a specialist in urinary conditions in men and women, called a urologist, a specialist in urinary conditions in women, called a urogynecologist, or a specialist in physical therapy.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For overactive bladder, questions might include:
Your healthcare professional may use an overactive bladder questionnaire to assess your symptoms. Questions might include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.