To help diagnose appendicitis, a healthcare professional will likely take a history of symptoms and examine the abdomen.
Tests used to diagnose appendicitis include:
Physical exam. A healthcare professional may apply gentle pressure on the painful area. When the pressure is suddenly released, appendicitis pain will often feel worse. This is because of inflammation of the lining of the abdominal cavity, called the peritoneum.
A care professional also may look for abdominal stiffness and a tendency to flex the abdominal muscles in response to pressure over the inflamed appendix. This is called guarding.
A care professional also may use a lubricated, gloved finger to examine the lower rectum. This is called a digital rectal exam. People of childbearing age may be given a pelvic exam to check for other problems that could be causing the pain.
Appendicitis treatment usually involves surgery to remove the appendix. Before surgery, antibiotics to treat infection may be given.
Appendectomy is a surgery to remove the appendix. Appendectomy can be performed as open surgery using one abdominal cut about 2 to 4 inches long. This is called laparotomy. The surgery also can be done through a few small abdominal cuts. This is called laparoscopic surgery. During a laparoscopic appendectomy, the surgeon places special tools and a video camera into your abdomen to remove your appendix.
In general, laparoscopic surgery allows you to recover faster and heal with less pain and scarring. It may be better for older adults and people with obesity.
But laparoscopic surgery isn't right for everyone. You may need an open appendectomy if your appendix has ruptured and infection has spread beyond the appendix, or you have an abscess. An open appendectomy allows your surgeon to clean the abdominal cavity.
Expect to spend 1 to 2 days in the hospital after your appendectomy.
If your appendix has burst and an abscess has formed around it, the abscess may be drained. To drain it, a tube is placed through your skin into the abscess. Appendectomy can be performed several weeks later, after the infection is under control.
If your appendicitis isn't serious and doesn't require surgery, antibiotics may be used alone. However, if the appendix isn't removed, there is a higher chance of appendicitis coming back.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Expect a few weeks of recovery from an appendectomy — or longer if your appendix burst. To help your body heal:
You will be prescribed medicines to help you control pain after your appendectomy. Other treatments, when used with your medicines, can help control pain. Ask your healthcare team about safe options, such as:
Make an appointment with a member of your healthcare team if you have abdominal pain. If you have appendicitis, you'll likely be hospitalized and referred to a surgeon to remove your appendix.
When you make the appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as fasting before having a specific test. Make a list of:
Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember the information you're given.
For appendicitis, some basic questions to ask include:
You are likely to be asked several questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.