Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Checking your blood pressure at home is an important part of managing high blood pressure. Find out how to use home monitors correctly.
Checking blood pressure at home is an important part of managing high blood pressure, called hypertension.
The American Heart Association (AHA) and other organizations recommend that people with high blood pressure monitor their blood pressure at home. Regularly checking blood pressure at home helps your care providers find out if treatment is working.
Home blood pressure monitors are available widely and without a prescription. But it's important to know how to find a good home blood pressure monitor and to use it correctly.
Monitoring your blood pressure at home can:
Not everyone can track blood pressure at home. For those with irregular heartbeats, home blood pressure monitors might not give the correct reading.
Most pharmacies, medical supply stores and some websites sell home blood pressure monitors. Experts recommend an automatic or electronic device. Your healthcare professional can help you pick the monitor that's best for you.
Blood pressure monitors generally have the same basic parts:
Digital monitors that are fitted on the upper arm are often the most accurate.
Some people with very large arms may not have access to a well-fitting upper arm cuff at home. If so, measuring blood pressure at the wrist or lower arm may be OK if used as directed and checked against measurements taken in your healthcare professional's office. For the most reliable blood pressure measurement, the American Heart Association recommends using a monitor with a cuff that goes around your upper arm, when available.
For people who can't check blood pressure at home, many pharmacies and stores have public blood pressure devices. The accuracy of these devices may vary.
When choosing a blood pressure monitor, consider:
Once a year, check the accuracy of your monitor by bringing it to your healthcare professional's office and comparing your monitor's readings with those taken at the office.
No matter what type of home blood pressure monitor you choose, proper use requires training and practice. Take the device to your healthcare professional to make sure the one you've chosen is the best fit for you. Learn to use the monitor correctly.
To help make sure you're checking your blood pressure at home correctly:
Blood pressure varies throughout the day. Readings are often a little higher in the morning. Also, your blood pressure might be slightly lower at home than in a medical office.
Contact your healthcare professional if you have any unusual increases in your blood pressure or if your blood pressure stays higher than usual. Ask them at what reading you should call the medical office right away.
Some people use a notebook to record their blood pressure readings.
If you have an electronic personal health record, you might choose to record your information using a computer or mobile device. This gives you the choice of sharing your readings with your healthcare team and family members. Some blood pressure monitors upload this data automatically.
If your blood pressure is well controlled, ask your healthcare professional how often you need to check it. You might be able to check it only once a day or less often. If you're just starting home monitoring or changing treatment, they might recommend checking blood pressure starting two weeks after treatment changes and a week before your next appointment.
Home blood pressure monitoring is not a substitute for medical visits. Home blood pressure monitors might not always be correct. Even if you get readings that are typical for you, don't stop or change your medicine or your diet without talking to your care team first. However, if continued home monitoring shows that your blood pressure is under control, you might be able to make fewer medical visits.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.