Your healthcare professional will ask you a number of questions about symptoms, health history, medicines and symptoms. The following will likely be used to determine whether you have thrombocytopenia:
Your care professional might suggest other tests and procedures to determine the cause of your condition depending on your signs and symptoms.
People with mild thrombocytopenia might not need treatment. Treatments for more-serious cases depend on the cause and the risk of complications.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
If you have symptoms of thrombocytopenia, start by seeing your primary healthcare professional. Also, a low platelet count may be found in a complete blood count test during an annual checkup or with tests for another condition.
You may be referred to a specialist in blood diseases, called a hematologist, or another specialist depending on the possible cause of a low platelet count.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
When you make the appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as restrict your diet.
Take along a family member or friend, if possible, to help you remember the information you receive.
Questions to ask your healthcare professional might include:
Questions your healthcare professional might ask include:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.