Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Find out why whole grains are better than refined grains and how to add more to your diet.
Whole-grain foods are good choices for a nutritious diet. Whole grains provide fiber, vitamins, minerals and other nutrients.
Whole-grain foods help control of cholesterol levels, weight and blood pressure. These foods also help lower the risk of diabetes, heart disease and other conditions.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that at least half of all the grains you eat are whole grains. Most people in the United States don't eat enough whole grains.
Grains are the seeds of grasses grown for food. These plants also are called cereals. Examples of grains include wheat, oats and rice. Each grain, also called a kernel, is made of three parts:
The bran from any kind of whole grain is a good source of fiber. Nutrients in whole grains vary. They may include the following nutrients and others:
Whole grains include the bran, germ and endosperm. The bran is the outer layer of the seed and contains most of the seed's fiber. The germ is the part of the seed that grows into a new plant. It has lots of vitamins and minerals. The endosperm is the energy source for a seed. It contains mostly starches.
Whole grains include the bran, germ and endosperm. The bran is the outer layer of the seed and contains most of the seed's fiber. The germ is the part of the seed that grows into a new plant. It has lots of vitamins and minerals. The endosperm is the energy source for a seed. It contains mostly starches.
Foods made from grains fall into these categories:
The terms "enriched" and "fortified" are often used to mean the same thing. The important point is that whole grain is the most nutritious choice. "Enriched" and "fortified" mean that there is some added benefit.
The vitamins and minerals in whole grains are important for your overall health. Also, the high fiber content of whole grains may help with:
Studies show high-fiber diets lower the risk of:
Make at least half the grains in your diet whole grains.
You can find whole-grain versions of rice, bread, cereal, flour and pasta at most grocery stores. Examples of whole grains and whole-grain foods include:
It's not always easy to know what kind of grain is in a product. For example, bread may look like it's made from whole wheat because it's brown. But the color may be from molasses or some other ingredient.
Ingredient labels can help you choose whole-grain foods. Tips for reading labels include the following:
Try these tips to add more whole grains to your meals and snacks:
Eating a variety of whole grains ensures that you get more health-promoting nutrients. A variety also helps make your meals and snacks more interesting.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.