Cyclosporine eye drops are used to increase tear production in patients who have a certain eye condition (eg, keratoconjunctivitis sicca). It is also used to treat vernal keratoconjunctivitis (allergic eye condition) and signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. This medicine belongs to a class of medicines known as immunosuppressants. 
This medicine is available only with your doctor's prescription. 
This product is available in the following dosage forms:
In deciding to use a medicine, the risks of taking the medicine must be weighed against the good it will do. This is a decision you and your doctor will make. For this medicine, the following should be considered:
Tell your doctor if you have ever had any unusual or allergic reaction to this medicine or any other medicines. Also tell your health care professional if you have any other types of allergies, such as to foods, dyes, preservatives, or animals. For non-prescription products, read the label or package ingredients carefully.
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of Cequa™ and Vevye® in children or Restasis ™ in children younger than 16 years of age. Safety and efficacy have not been established. 
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated pediatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of Verkazia® in children 4 years of age and older. Safety and efficacy have been established. 
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated geriatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of Cequa™, Restasis ™, or Vevye® in the elderly. 
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of Verkazia® in the elderly. Safety and efficacy have not been established. 
There are no adequate studies in women for determining infant risk when using this medication during breastfeeding. Weigh the potential benefits against the potential risks before taking this medication while breastfeeding.
Although certain medicines should not be used together at all, in other cases two different medicines may be used together even if an interaction might occur. In these cases, your doctor may want to change the dose, or other precautions may be necessary. Tell your healthcare professional if you are taking any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter [OTC]) medicine.
Certain medicines should not be used at or around the time of eating food or eating certain types of food since interactions may occur.  Using alcohol or tobacco with certain medicines may also cause interactions to occur.  Discuss with your healthcare professional the use of your medicine with food, alcohol, or tobacco.
Take this medicine only as directed by your eye doctor (ophthalmologist). Do not use more of it, do not use it more often, and do not take it for a longer time than your doctor ordered. 
This medicine should come with patient instructions. Read and follow the instructions carefully. Ask your doctor if you have any questions. 
You may use Verkazia® for at least 10 minutes before using other eye products (eg, eye ointment, gel, or other thick eye drops). 
If you or your child are wearing contact lenses, remove them while you are using this medicine. You can reinsert your contacts 15 minutes after you put the medicine in your eyes. Talk to your eye doctor about this if you have questions. 
You might not use all of the medicine in each single-dose vial. Use each single-dose vial only one time. Do not save an open single-dose vial. 
To help clear up your eye infection completely, keep using this medicine for the full time of treatment, even if your symptoms have disappeared and even if you feel better after the first few doses. Your infection may not clear up if you stop using the medicine too soon. Do not miss any doses. 
The dose of this medicine will be different for different patients. Follow your doctor's orders or the directions on the label. The following information includes only the average doses of this medicine. If your dose is different, do not change it unless your doctor tells you to do so.
The amount of medicine that you take depends on the strength of the medicine. Also, the number of doses you take each day, the time allowed between doses, and the length of time you take the medicine depend on the medical problem for which you are using the medicine.
If you miss a dose of this medicine, apply it as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule.
If you miss a dose of Verkazia®, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not double doses. 
Store the medicine in a closed container at room temperature, away from heat, moisture, and direct light. Keep from freezing.
Do not keep outdated medicine or medicine no longer needed.
Ask your healthcare professional how you should dispose of any medicine you do not use.
It is very important that your eye doctor check your or your child's eyes at regular visits to make sure this medicine is working properly and to check for unwanted effects. 
If your or your child's symptoms do not improve or if they become worse, check with your doctor. 
This medicine may cause blurred vision or other vision problems. If any of these occur, do not drive or do anything else that could be dangerous until you know how this medicine affects you. 
While applying this medicine, your eyes will probably sting or burn for a short time. This is to be expected. 
Along with its needed effects, a medicine may cause some unwanted effects. Although not all of these side effects may occur, if they do occur they may need medical attention.
Check with your doctor immediately if any of the following side effects occur:
Some side effects may occur that usually do not need medical attention. These side effects may go away during treatment as your body adjusts to the medicine. Also, your health care professional may be able to tell you about ways to prevent or reduce some of these side effects. Check with your health care professional if any of the following side effects continue or are bothersome or if you have any questions about them:
Other side effects not listed may also occur in some patients. If you notice any other effects, check with your healthcare professional.
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
Drug information provided by: Merative, Micromedex®
Portions of this document last updated: February 01, 2025

Copyright: © Merative US L.P. 1973, 2025. All rights reserved. Information is for End User's use only and may not be sold, redistributed or otherwise used for commercial purposes.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our non-profit mission.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.