To understand the cause of your edema, a health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your medical history. This might be enough to figure out the cause. Sometimes, diagnosis might require blood tests, ultrasound exams, vein studies or others.
Mild edema usually goes away on its own. Wearing compression garments and raising the affected arm or leg higher than the heart helps.
Medicines that help the body get rid of too much fluid through urine can treat worse forms of edema. One of the most common of these water pills, also known as diuretics, is furosemide (Lasix). A health care provider can decide about the need for water pills.
Treating the cause of the swelling is often the focus over time. If edema is a result of medicines, for example, a care provider might change the dose or look for another medicine that doesn't cause edema.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Compression stockings, also called support stockings, press on the legs, improving blood flow. A stocking butler may help with putting on the stockings.
Compression stockings, also called support stockings, press on the legs, improving blood flow. A stocking butler may help with putting on the stockings.
The following may help decrease edema and keep it from coming back. Talk to your health care provider about which of these might help you.
Use pressure. If edema affects an arm or leg, wearing compression stockings, sleeves or gloves might help. These garments keep pressure on the limbs to prevent fluid from building up. Usually worn after the swelling goes down, they help prevent more swelling.
For pregnant people, wearing support stockings during air travel might help.
Unless you're already seeing a health care provider for a condition such as pregnancy, you'll probably start by seeing your family provider.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For edema, some questions to ask might include:
Your provider is likely to ask you questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.