During in vitro fertilization, eggs are removed from sacs called follicles within an ovary (A). An egg is fertilized by injecting a single sperm into the egg or mixing the egg with sperm in a petri dish (B). The fertilized egg, called an embryo, is transferred into the uterus (C).
During in vitro fertilization, eggs are removed from sacs called follicles within an ovary (A). An egg is fertilized by injecting a single sperm into the egg or mixing the egg with sperm in a petri dish (B). The fertilized egg, called an embryo, is transferred into the uterus (C).
In vitro fertilization, also called IVF, is a complex series of procedures that can lead to a pregnancy. It's a treatment for infertility, a condition in which you can't get pregnant after at least a year of trying for most couples. IVF also can be used to prevent passing on genetic problems to a child.
During in vitro fertilization, mature eggs are collected from ovaries and fertilized by sperm in a lab. Then a procedure is done to place one or more of the fertilized eggs, called embryos, in a uterus, which is where babies develop. One full cycle of IVF takes about 2 to 3 weeks. Sometimes these steps are split into different parts and the process can take longer.
In vitro fertilization is the most effective type of fertility treatment that involves the handling of eggs or embryos and sperm. Together, this group of treatments is called assisted reproductive technology.
IVF can be done using a couple's own eggs and sperm. Or it may involve eggs, sperm or embryos from a known or unknown donor. In some cases, a gestational carrier — someone who has an embryo implanted in the uterus — might be used.
Your chances of having a healthy baby using IVF depend on many factors, such as your age and the cause of infertility. What's more, IVF involves getting procedures that can be time-consuming, expensive and invasive. If more than one embryo is placed in the uterus, it can result in a pregnancy with more than one baby. This is called a multiple pregnancy.
Your health care team can help you understand how IVF works, what the risks are and whether it's right for you.
In vitro fertilization is a treatment for infertility or genetic problems. Before you have IVF to treat infertility, you and your partner might be able to try other treatment options that involve fewer or no procedures that enter the body. For example, fertility drugs can help the ovaries make more eggs. And a procedure called intrauterine insemination places sperm directly in the uterus near the time when an ovary releases an egg, called ovulation.
Sometimes, IVF is offered as a main treatment for infertility in people over the age of 40. It also can be done if you have certain health conditions. For example, IVF may be an option if you or your partner has:
A desire to preserve fertility due to cancer or other health conditions. Cancer treatments such as radiation or chemotherapy can harm fertility. If you're about to start treatment for cancer, IVF could be a way to still have a baby in the future. Eggs can be harvested from their ovaries and frozen for later use. Or the eggs can be fertilized and frozen as embryos for future use.
People who don't have a working uterus or for whom pregnancy poses a serious health risk might choose IVF using another person to carry the pregnancy. The person is called a gestational carrier. In this case, your eggs are fertilized with sperm, but the embryos that result are placed in the gestational carrier's uterus.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
IVF raises the chances of certain health problems. From short term to longer term, these risks include:
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. This is a condition in which the ovaries become swollen and painful. It can be caused by receiving shots of fertility medicines, such as human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), to trigger ovulation.
Symptoms often last up to a week. They include mild belly pain, bloating, upset stomach, vomiting and diarrhea. If you become pregnant, your symptoms might last a few weeks. Rarely, some people get a worse form of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome that also can cause rapid weight gain and shortness of breath.
To get started, you'll want to find a reputable fertility clinic. If you live in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology provide information online about clinics' individual pregnancy and live birth rates.
A fertility clinic's success rate depends on many things. These include the ages and medical issues of people they treat, as well as the clinic's treatment approaches. When you talk with a representative at a clinic, also ask for detailed information about the costs of each step of the procedure.
Before you start a cycle of IVF using your own eggs and sperm, you and your partner will likely need various screening tests. These include:
Before you begin a cycle of IVF, think about some key questions, including:
How many embryos will be transferred? The number of embryos placed in the uterus often is based on age and the number of eggs collected. Since the rate of fertilized eggs attaching to the lining of uterus is lower for older people, usually more embryos are transferred — except for people who use donor eggs from a young person, genetically tested embryos or in certain other cases.
Most health care professionals follow specific guidelines to prevent a multiple pregnancy with triplets or more. In some countries, legislation limits the number of embryos that can be transferred. Make sure you and your care team agree on the number of embryos that will be placed in the uterus before the transfer procedure.
What will you do with any extra embryos? Extra embryos can be frozen and stored for future use for many years. Not all embryos will survive the freezing and thawing process, but most will.
Having frozen embryos can make future cycles of IVF less expensive and less invasive. Or you might be able to donate unused frozen embryos to another couple or a research facility. You also might choose to discard unused embryos. Make sure you feel comfortable making decisions about extra embryos before they are created.
After the preparations are completed, one cycle of IVF can take about 2 to 3 weeks. More than one cycle may be needed. The steps in a cycle go as follows:
The start of an IVF cycle begins by using lab-made hormones to help the ovaries to make eggs — rather than the single egg that usually develops each month. Multiple eggs are needed because some eggs won't fertilize or develop correctly after they're combined with sperm.
Your doctor decides which medicines to use and when to use them.
Most often, you'll need 1 to 2 weeks of ovarian stimulation before your eggs are ready to be collected with the egg retrieval procedure. To figure out when the eggs are ready, you may need:
Sometimes, IVF cycles need to be canceled before the eggs are collected. Reasons for this include:
If your cycle is canceled, your care team might recommend changing medicines or the amounts you take, called doses. This might lead to a better response during future IVF cycles. Or you may be advised that you need an egg donor.
This is the procedure to collect the eggs from one or both ovaries. It takes place in your doctor's office or a clinic. The procedure is done 34 to 36 hours after the final shot of fertility medicine and before ovulation.
If you're using your partner's sperm, a semen sample needs to be collected at your doctor's office or clinic the morning of egg retrieval. Or sperm can be collected ahead of time and frozen.
Most often, the semen sample is collected through masturbation. Other methods can be used if a person can't ejaculate or has no sperm in the semen. For example, a procedure called testicular aspiration uses a needle or surgery to collect sperm directly from the testicle. Sperm from a donor also can be used. Sperm are separated from the semen fluid in the lab.
Two common methods can be used to try to fertilize eggs with sperm:
In certain situations, other procedures may be recommended before embryos are placed in the uterus. These include:
Assisted hatching. About 5 to 6 days after fertilization, an embryo "hatches" from the thin layer that surrounds it, called a membrane. This lets the embryo attach to the lining of the uterus.
If you're older and you want to get pregnant, or if you have had past IVF attempts that didn't work, a technique called assisted hatching might be recommended. With this procedure, a hole is made in the embryo's membrane just before the embryo is placed in the uterus. This helps the embryo hatch and attach to the lining of the uterus. Assisted hatching is also useful for eggs or embryos that were frozen, as that process can harden the membrane.
Preimplantation genetic testing. Embryos are allowed to develop in the incubator until they reach a stage where a small sample can be removed. The sample is tested for certain genetic diseases or the correct number of threadlike structures of DNA, called chromosomes. There are usually 46 chromosomes in each cell. Embryos that don't contain affected genes or chromosomes can be transferred to the uterus.
Preimplantation genetic testing can lower the chances that a parent will pass on a genetic problem. It can't get rid of the risk completely. Prenatal testing may still be recommended during pregnancy.
Typically, transvaginal ultrasound aspiration is used to retrieve eggs. During this procedure, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the vagina to identify follicles. A needle is guided through the vagina and into the follicles. The eggs are removed from the follicles through the needle, which is connected to a suction device.
Typically, transvaginal ultrasound aspiration is used to retrieve eggs. During this procedure, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the vagina to identify follicles. A needle is guided through the vagina and into the follicles. The eggs are removed from the follicles through the needle, which is connected to a suction device.
In intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), a single healthy sperm is injected directly into each mature egg. ICSI often is used when semen quality or number is a problem or if fertilization attempts during prior in vitro fertilization cycles failed.
In intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), a single healthy sperm is injected directly into each mature egg. ICSI often is used when semen quality or number is a problem or if fertilization attempts during prior in vitro fertilization cycles failed.
Three days after fertilization, a healthy embryo will contain about 6 to 10 cells. By the fifth or sixth day, the fertilized egg is known as a blastocyst — a rapidly dividing ball of cells. The inner group of cells will become the embryo. The outer group will become the cells that nourish and protect it.
Three days after fertilization, a healthy embryo will contain about 6 to 10 cells. By the fifth or sixth day, the fertilized egg is known as a blastocyst — a rapidly dividing ball of cells. The inner group of cells will become the embryo. The outer group will become the cells that nourish and protect it.
The procedure to place one or more embryos in the uterus is done at your doctor's office or a clinic. It often takes place 2 to 6 days after eggs are collected.
If the procedure works, an embryo will attach to the lining of your uterus about 6 to 10 days after egg retrieval.
After the embryo transfer, you can get back to your usual daily routine. Your ovaries may still be enlarged, so vigorous activities or sex might cause discomfort. Ask your care team how long you should stay away from these.
Call your care team if you have moderate or severe pain, or heavy bleeding from the vagina after the embryo transfer. You'll likely to need to get checked for complications such as infection, twisting of an ovary and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.
At least 12 days after egg retrieval, you get a blood test to find out whether you're pregnant.
The chances of giving birth to a healthy baby after using IVF depend on various factors, including:
Talk with your care team about any factors that apply to you and how they may affect your chances of a successful pregnancy.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.