Budesonide is used to treat mild to moderate active Crohn's disease, an inflammatory bowel disease. This medicine works inside the intestines (bowels) to reduce inflammation and symptoms of the disease. It also helps keep the symptoms of Crohn's disease from coming back. Budesonide is a steroid (cortisone-like) medicine. 
Budesonide extended-release tablets are used to help get active mild to moderate ulcerative colitis under control (induce remission). 
Budesonide delayed-release capsules are used to reduce levels of protein in the urine (proteinuria) in patients who have a kidney disease called primary immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN), who are at risk of progressing. 
Budesonide oral liquid is used to treat eosinophilic esophagitis (inflammation of the esophagus). 
This medicine is available only with your doctor's prescription. 
This product is available in the following dosage forms:
In deciding to use a medicine, the risks of taking the medicine must be weighed against the good it will do. This is a decision you and your doctor will make. For this medicine, the following should be considered:
Tell your doctor if you have ever had any unusual or allergic reaction to this medicine or any other medicines. Also tell your health care professional if you have any other types of allergies, such as to foods, dyes, preservatives, or animals. For non-prescription products, read the label or package ingredients carefully.
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated pediatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of budesonide delayed-release capsules in children 8 to 17 years of age and weighing more than 25 kilograms (kg). However, safety and efficacy have not been established in children younger than 8 years of age, or in children 8 to 17 years of age and weighs 25 kg or less. Safety and efficacy have not been established to help keep the symptoms of Crohn's disease from coming back in children. Because budesonide may cause slowed growth in children, those who will be using it for a long time should have their weight and growth measured by the doctor regularly. 
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of budesonide extended-release tablets in the pediatric population. Safety and efficacy have not been established. Because budesonide may cause slowed growth in children, those who will be using it for a long time should have their weight and growth measured by the doctor regularly. 
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of Tarpeyo™ delayed-release capsules in the pediatric population. Safety and efficacy have not been established. 
Appropriate studies have not been performed on the relationship of age to the effects of budesonide oral liquid in children younger than 11 years of age. Safety and efficacy have not been established. Because budesonide may cause slowed growth in children, those who will be using it for a long time should have their weight and growth measured by a doctor regularly. 
Appropriate studies performed to date have not demonstrated geriatric-specific problems that would limit the usefulness of budesonide in the elderly. However, elderly patients are more likely to have age-related liver, kidney, or heart problems, which may require caution and an adjustment in the dose for patients receiving budesonide. 
There are no adequate studies in women for determining infant risk when using this medication during breastfeeding. Weigh the potential benefits against the potential risks before taking this medication while breastfeeding.
Although certain medicines should not be used together at all, in other cases two different medicines may be used together even if an interaction might occur. In these cases, your doctor may want to change the dose, or other precautions may be necessary. When you are taking this medicine, it is especially important that your healthcare professional know if you are taking any of the medicines listed below. The following interactions have been selected on the basis of their potential significance and are not necessarily all-inclusive.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines is not recommended. Your doctor may decide not to treat you with this medication or change some of the other medicines you take.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines is usually not recommended, but may be required in some cases. If both medicines are prescribed together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use one or both of the medicines.
Using this medicine with any of the following medicines may cause an increased risk of certain side effects, but using both drugs may be the best treatment for you. If both medicines are prescribed together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use one or both of the medicines.
Certain medicines should not be used at or around the time of eating food or eating certain types of food since interactions may occur.  Using alcohol or tobacco with certain medicines may also cause interactions to occur.  The following interactions have been selected on the basis of their potential significance and are not necessarily all-inclusive.
Using this medicine with any of the following is usually not recommended, but may be unavoidable in some cases. If used together, your doctor may change the dose or how often you use this medicine, or give you special instructions about the use of food, alcohol, or tobacco.
The presence of other medical problems may affect the use of this medicine. Make sure you tell your doctor if you have any other medical problems, especially:
Take this medicine exactly as directed by your doctor. Do not take more of it, do not take it more often, and do not take it for a longer time than your doctor ordered. Also, do not stop using this medicine without first checking with your doctor. 
This medicine comes with a patient information leaflet and patient instructions. Read and follow the instructions carefully. Ask your doctor if you have any questions. 
Swallow the delayed-release capsule and extended-release tablet whole. Do not break, crush, chew, or open it. 
Take Tarpeyo™ delayed-release capsules in the morning, at least 1 hour before a meal. 
If you cannot swallow the Entocort® EC delayed-release capsule, you may open it and mix the granules into a tablespoonful of applesauce (not hot). Swallow the mixture whole. Do not chew or crush the granules. Take the mixture within 30 minutes. Drink a glass (8 ounces) of water right after. 
Keep using this medicine for the full time of treatment, even if you begin to feel better after a few days. Do not miss any doses. 
Grapefruit and grapefruit juice may increase the effects of budesonide by increasing the amount of this medicine in your body. You should not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while you are using this medicine. 
The dose of this medicine will be different for different patients. Follow your doctor's orders or the directions on the label. The following information includes only the average doses of this medicine. If your dose is different, do not change it unless your doctor tells you to do so.
The amount of medicine that you take depends on the strength of the medicine. Also, the number of doses you take each day, the time allowed between doses, and the length of time you take the medicine depend on the medical problem for which you are using the medicine.
If you miss a dose of this medicine, take it as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not double doses.
If you miss a dose of Tarpeyo™ delayed-release capsules, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not double doses. 
Do not keep outdated medicine or medicine no longer needed.
Ask your healthcare professional how you should dispose of any medicine you do not use.
Store the medicine in a closed container at room temperature, away from heat, moisture, and direct light. Keep from freezing.
Throw away any unused applesauce mixture after 30 minutes. 
You may store the oral liquid in the refrigerator or at room temperature. Do not freeze. 
It is very important that your doctor check your or your child's progress at regular visits to make sure that this medicine is working properly. Blood and urine tests may be needed to check for unwanted effects. 
If your condition does not improve or if it become worse, check with your doctor right away. 
This medicine may cause serious allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, which can be life-threatening and requires immediate medical attention. The most serious signs of this reaction are very fast or irregular breathing, gasping for breath, or fainting. Other signs may include changes in color of the skin of the face, very fast and irregular heartbeat or pulse, hive-like swelling on the skin, and puffiness or swelling of the eyelids or around the eyes. If these side effects occur, get emergency help at once. 
Using too much of this medicine or using it for a long time may increase your risk of having adrenal gland problems. Talk to your doctor if you have darkening of the skin, diarrhea, dizziness, fainting, loss of appetite, mental depression, nausea, skin rash, unusual tiredness or weakness, or vomiting. 
If you are taking another steroid medicine and will switch to Entocort® EC, Eohilia™, Ortikos™, Tarpeyo™, or Uceris®, check first with your doctor. This may increase your chance of having steroid withdrawal side effects, including headache, loss of appetite, blurred vision, change in the ability to see colors (especially blue or yellow), or vomiting. 
You may get infections more easily while using this medicine. Avoid people who are sick or have infections. Tell your doctor right away if you have been exposed to someone with chickenpox or measles. If you start to have a fever, chills, sore throat, or any other sign of an infection, call your doctor right away. 
This medicine may cause erosive esophagitis (damage to the lining of the esophagus). Call your doctor right away if you have chest pain, heartburn, or trouble swallowing. 
This medicine may cause slow growth in children. If your child is using this medicine, tell the doctor if you think your child is not growing properly. 
This medicine may increase your risk for cancer, including Kaposi's sarcoma. Tell your doctor right away if you have flat, painless spots that are red or purple on white skin and bluish, brownish, or black on dark skin. 
Make sure any doctor or dentist who treats you knows that you are using this medicine. You may need to stop using this medicine several days before having surgery or medical tests. 
Do not take other medicines unless they have been discussed with your doctor. This includes prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter [OTC]) medicines and herbal or vitamin supplements. 
Along with its needed effects, a medicine may cause some unwanted effects. Although not all of these side effects may occur, if they do occur they may need medical attention.
Check with your doctor immediately if any of the following side effects occur:
Some side effects may occur that usually do not need medical attention. These side effects may go away during treatment as your body adjusts to the medicine. Also, your health care professional may be able to tell you about ways to prevent or reduce some of these side effects. Check with your health care professional if any of the following side effects continue or are bothersome or if you have any questions about them:
Other side effects not listed may also occur in some patients. If you notice any other effects, check with your healthcare professional.
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
Drug information provided by: Merative, Micromedex®
Portions of this document last updated: July 01, 2025

Copyright: © Merative US L.P. 1973, 2025. All rights reserved. Information is for End User's use only and may not be sold, redistributed or otherwise used for commercial purposes.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our non-profit mission.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.