Diagnosis involves the steps that your healthcare professional takes to find out if you have kidney stones. Diagnosis also can include testing to find the cause and chemical makeup of kidney stones. Your healthcare professional starts by giving you a physical exam. You also may need tests such as:
Imaging. Imaging tests such as CT scans may show kidney stones in your urinary tract. An advanced scan known as a high-speed or dual energy CT scan may help find tiny uric acid stones. Simple X-rays of the stomach area, also called the abdomen, are used less often. That's because this kind of imaging test can miss small kidney stones.
Ultrasound is another imaging option to diagnose kidney stones.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your kidney stones-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for kidney stones varies. It depends on the type of stone and the cause.
Most small kidney stones don't require invasive treatment such as surgery. You may be able to pass a small stone by:
The four tiny parathyroid glands, which lie near the thyroid, make the parathyroid hormone. The hormone plays a role in controlling levels of the minerals calcium and phosphorus in the body.
The four tiny parathyroid glands, which lie near the thyroid, make the parathyroid hormone. The hormone plays a role in controlling levels of the minerals calcium and phosphorus in the body.
Kidney stones that are too large to pass on their own may need more-extensive treatment. So might stones that cause bleeding, kidney damage or ongoing urinary tract infections. Treatments may include:
Using sound waves to break up stones. For some kidney stones, your healthcare professional may recommend a treatment called extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. This also is known as ESWL. But it depends on the size and location of your stones.
ESWL uses sound waves to create strong vibrations called shock waves that break the stones into tiny pieces that can be passed in urine. The treatment lasts about 45 to 60 minutes. It can cause moderate pain, so you may be given medicines to prevent pain or help relax you.
ESWL can cause blood in the urine and bruising on the back or stomach area. It also can cause bleeding around the kidney and around other nearby organs. It can cause discomfort as the stone fragments pass through the urinary tract too.
Surgery to remove very large stones in the kidney. A surgery called percutaneous nephrolithotomy (nef-row-lih-THOT-uh-me) involves removing a kidney stone using small telescopes and tools inserted through a small cut in the back or side.
You receive medicine called a general anesthetic that prevents pain and puts you in a sleep-like state during the surgery. You'll likely recover in the hospital for 1 to 3 days afterward. Your healthcare professional may recommend this surgery if ESWL doesn't help you enough.
Using a scope to remove stones. To remove a smaller stone in your ureter or kidney, your surgeon may use a thin lighted tube called a ureteroscope. This instrument is equipped with a camera. The surgeon places the uteroscope through the urethra and bladder to the ureter.
Once the stone is found, special tools can snare the stone or break it into pieces that will pass in the urine. Then the surgeon may place a small tube called a stent in the ureter to relieve swelling and support healing. You may need general or local anesthesia during this procedure.
Parathyroid gland surgery. Some calcium phosphate stones are caused by overactive parathyroid glands. These glands are located on the four corners of the thyroid gland, just below the Adam's apple. When these glands make too much parathyroid hormone, that's a condition known as hyperparathyroidism. The condition can cause calcium levels to become too high, and kidney stones may form as a result.
Hyperparathyroidism sometimes happens when a small tumor that isn't cancer forms in one of the parathyroid glands. Or hyperparathyroidism can happen if you develop another condition that leads these glands to make more parathyroid hormone. Removing the tumor from the gland stops kidney stones from forming. Or your healthcare professional may recommend treatment of the condition that's causing your parathyroid gland to make too much of the hormone.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Small kidney stones that don't block your kidney or cause other health troubles can be treated by your primary healthcare professional. But if you have a large kidney stone and have serious pain or kidney troubles, you may need to see a specialist. Your healthcare professional may refer you to a doctor called a urologist or a nephrologist who treats conditions of the urinary tract.
For kidney stones, some basic questions include:
Feel free to ask any other questions during your appointment.
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.