Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Women's Health / Worried about pregnancy after unprotected sex? You have options.
A lot of people, especially young women, don't know about emergency contraception or how to use it effectively.
During my third-year Ob-Gyn rotation in medical school, I would see patients around my age and straddle the line between provider and peer. One young woman was in her first serious relationship and wanted to start birth control after a pregnancy scare. We discussed her options and settled on an IUD, an excellent and incredibly effective form of birth control. (Learn more about IUDs here.)
When I brought up having emergency contraception until her IUD placement, she looked at me blankly. After I explained how emergency contraception works, she wished she had known about it earlier and prevented weeks of stress and worry.
A lot of people, especially young women, don’t know about emergency contraception or how to use it effectively. Others worry it is unsafe or can make it harder to become pregnant in the future. In fact, there are a number of options for emergency contraception. Some also work as long-term contraception.
If you recently had unprotected sex — or your birth control failed in some way, such as a condom breaking — and want to make sure you don’t get pregnant as a result, there are several options. These include:
Though IUDs are the most effective form of emergency contraception, the pills are also quite effective. About 97% to 99% of women will not become pregnant after taking the pills within the recommended time frame.
Oral contraception pills like Plan B or Ulipristal are more effective when they are taken sooner after unprotected intercourse. IUDs are equally effective at any point up to 5 days after unprotected intercourse.
An important note: Higher weights can make oral emergency contraception pills less effective. Over the counter progestin-only pills are less effective if you weigh over 165 pounds and ulipristal is less effective if you weigh over 195 pounds. In these cases, you may want to consider an IUD.
After taking oral emergency contraception pills, some people experience headaches, nausea, fatigue, and vaginal spotting or bleeding. These symptoms should go away within a week, though irregular bleeding can last for up to a month. These pills have no long-term side effects.
IUDs are very safe but not risk free. IUDs can very rarely perforate, or poke a hole through, the uterus. IUDs also can be uncomfortable when inserted, especially if you haven’t had children before.
Using emergency contraception prevents you from getting pregnant, which is why it must be used within a few days of unprotected intercourse. It is not considered pregnancy termination or abortion. It works mainly by preventing or delaying ovulation.
Emergency contraception does not affect your ability to get pregnant in the future. If you choose to use an IUD, fertility returns within a few days of IUD removal.
You can buy emergency contraception pills ahead of time so they are available when you need them. You can buy the progestin-only pill at your local pharmacy or ask your doctor for a prescription for ulipristal during a health care visit.
While it is safe to take emergency contraception as many times as you need it, it is not a good substitute for effective, long-term birth control. You can talk to your primary care doctor or Ob-Gyn to find ongoing birth control that is right for you.
The following articles are great resources if you want to learn more:
Are you tired of playing catch-up with your health, always racing to address problems rather than preventing them in the first place? The Holistic Health Bundle will help you cultivate all aspects of your health — mind, body and spirit — regardless of your health status. Mayo Clinic Guide to…
Discover more Women's Health content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Andres J. Acosta, M.D., Ph.D., Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN

      Lily Dyre is a third-year medical student at the Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine in Arizona. She is interested in women's health and hopes to become an Ob-Gyn physician.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by John D. Halamka, M.D., M.S., Paul Cerrato, M.A.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.