To diagnose hives or angioedema, your doctor will likely look at your welts or areas of swelling and ask about your medical history. You may also need blood tests or an allergy skin test.
If your symptoms are mild, you may not need treatment. Hives and angioedema often clear up on their own. But treatment can offer relief from intense itching, serious discomfort or symptoms that persist.
Treatments for hives and angioedema may include prescription drugs:
For a severe attack of hives or angioedema, you may need a trip to the emergency room and an emergency injection of epinephrine — a type of adrenaline. If you have had a serious attack or your attacks recur despite treatment, your doctor may have you carry a penlike device that will allow you to self-inject epinephrine in emergencies.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you're experiencing mild hives or angioedema, these tips may help relieve your symptoms:
You're likely to start by seeing your primary care doctor. In some cases when you call to set up an appointment, you may be referred immediately to a skin disease specialist (dermatologist) or to an allergy specialist.
Here are some tips to help you get ready for your appointment.
For hives and angioedema, questions you may want to ask include:
Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.