Mild cognitive impairment is the in-between stage between typical thinking skills and dementia. The condition causes memory loss and trouble with language and judgment, but it doesn't affect daily activities.
People with mild cognitive impairment, also known as MCI, may be aware that their memory or mental ability has changed. Family and close friends also may notice changes. But these changes aren't bad enough to impact daily life or affect usual activities.
MCI raises the risk of developing dementia caused by Alzheimer's disease or other brain conditions. But for some people with mild cognitive impairment, symptoms might never get worse or even get better.

                Join thousands of readers who trust Mayo Clinic Health Letter for reliable health tips and insights. Start your journey to better health today.
            
Symptoms of mild cognitive impairment, also known as MCI, include trouble with memory, language and judgment. The symptoms are more serious than the memory issues that are expected as people get older. But the symptoms don't affect daily life at work or at home.
The brain, like the rest of the body, changes with age. Many people notice they become more forgetful as they age. It may take longer to think of a word or to recall a person's name. But if concerns with memory go beyond what's expected, the symptoms may be due to mild cognitive impairment.
People with MCI may have symptoms that include:
Talk to your healthcare professional if you or someone close to you notices changes in memory or thinking. This may include forgetting recent events or having trouble thinking clearly.
Some changes in brain structure are typical with aging. For example, the size of the brain's memory center, known as the hippocampus, gets smaller with age. But the reduction in size is greater in those with mild cognitive impairment and even more dramatic in people with Alzheimer's disease.
Some changes in brain structure are typical with aging. For example, the size of the brain's memory center, known as the hippocampus, gets smaller with age. But the reduction in size is greater in those with mild cognitive impairment and even more dramatic in people with Alzheimer's disease.
Dementia causes the brain to lose mass, especially in critical areas. Note the difference in size between a healthy brain (top), a mild cognitive impairment brain (middle) and an Alzheimer's disease brain (bottom).
Dementia causes the brain to lose mass, especially in critical areas. Note the difference in size between a healthy brain (top), a mild cognitive impairment brain (middle) and an Alzheimer's disease brain (bottom).
There's no single cause of mild cognitive impairment. In some people, mild cognitive impairment is due to Alzheimer's disease. But there's no single outcome. Symptoms may remain stable for years or they may improve over time. Or mild cognitive impairment may progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia or another type of dementia.
Mild cognitive impairment, also known as MCI, often involves the same types of brain changes seen in Alzheimer's disease or other dementias. But in MCI, the changes occur at a lesser degree. Some of these changes have been seen in autopsy studies of people with mild cognitive impairment.
Brain-imaging studies show that the following changes may be related to MCI:
The strongest risk factors for mild cognitive impairment are:
Other medical conditions and lifestyle factors have been linked to a higher risk of changes in thinking, including:
Complications of mild cognitive impairment include a higher risk — but not a certainty — of dementia. Overall, about 1% to 3% of older adults develop dementia every year. Studies suggest that around 10% to 15% of people with mild cognitive impairment go on to develop dementia each year.
Mild cognitive impairment can't be prevented. But research has found that some lifestyle factors may lower the risk of getting it. These steps may offer some protection:

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.