A sore throat is pain or irritation of the throat. Swallowing often makes it feel worse. The most common cause of a sore throat, also called pharyngitis, is a viral infection, such as a cold or the flu. A sore throat from a virus goes away on its own.
Strep throat, also called a streptococcal infection, is a less common type of sore throat. Bacteria causes it. Strep throat needs treatment with antibiotics.
There are other less common causes of sore throat. They might need more treatment.
Symptoms of a sore throat vary depending on the cause. Symptoms might include:

      The throat includes the food pipe, also called the esophagus; the windpipe, also called the trachea; the voice box, also called the larynx; tonsils; and the flap that covers the windpipe during swallowing, also called the epiglottis.
      
If an infection causes a sore throat, symptoms also might include:
Take your child to a healthcare professional if the sore throat doesn't go away after taking a drink in the morning. This advice is from the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Get immediate care for a child who has severe symptoms such as:
If you're an adult, see a healthcare professional for a sore throat and any of the following problems. This advice comes from the American Academy of Otolaryngology — Head and Neck Surgery:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Viruses that cause the common cold and the flu also cause most sore throats. Less often, bacterial infections cause sore throats.
Many viral illnesses cause a sore throat such as:
Many bacterial infections can cause a sore throat. The most common bacterium that causes a sore throat is Streptococcus pyogenes, also called group A streptococcus. This bacterium causes strep throat and other illnesses. Strep throat is most common in school-age children and teens.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). GERD causes stomach acid to back up in the food pipe, also called the esophagus.
Other symptoms might include heartburn, hoarseness, stomach contents going back up the food pipe and the feeling of having a lump in the throat.
Rarely, an infected area of tissue, also called an abscess, in the throat can cause a sore throat. So can swelling of the flap that covers the windpipe during swallowing, also called the epiglottis. Either can block the airway, which is a medical emergency.
Anyone can get a sore throat. But some things make it more likely to get one, including:
The best way to prevent sore throats is to avoid the germs that cause them and to stay clean. Follow these tips and teach children to do the same:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.