Diagnosing the cause of itchy skin starts with a physical exam and questions about your medical history. If your health care provider thinks your itchy skin is the result of a medical condition, you might have tests, including:
Itchy skin treatment focuses on removing the cause of the itch. If home remedies don't ease your symptoms, your health care provider may recommend prescription medicine or other treatments. Controlling itchy skin symptoms can be challenging and may require long-term therapy. Options include:
Corticosteroid creams and ointments. If your skin is itchy and inflamed, your health care provider may suggest applying a medicated cream or ointment to the affected areas. You might then cover the treated skin with damp cotton material. Moisture helps the skin absorb the cream and has a cooling effect.
If you have severe or long-term itching, your health care provider might suggest this bedtime routine: Bathe in plain lukewarm water for 20 minutes, and then apply triamcinolone .025% to 0.1% ointment to the wet skin. This traps the moisture and helps the medicine absorb. Then put on pajamas. Repeat this routine at bedtime for several nights.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Vivien Williams: Drink plenty of water. Don't smoke and wash your face and body each day with a gentle hypoallergenic soap for healthy-looking skin says Mayo Clinic dermatologist, Dr. Dawn Davis. And, after bathing,
Dawn Davis, M.D., Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: Moisturize with a hypoallergenic, fragrance-free moisturizer when you're done to help the skin hydrate.
Vivien Williams: With so many products from which to choose, how do you pick the right moisturizer? Dr. Davis says hypoallergenic is the key.
Dr. Davis: So you want it to be fragrance-free. Unscented doesn't necessarily mean that it doesn't have fragrance. Oftentimes unscented just means more chemicals.
Vivien Williams: What ingredient should you look for?
Dr. Davis: The most inert natural hypoallergenic product that you can find in a moisturizer is petrolatum.
Vivien Williams: As in petroleum jelly. Dr. Davis has another important tip for healthy skin care that could potentially save your life.
Dr. Davis: Please remember to wear your sunscreen.
Vivien Williams: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.
For temporary relief of itching, try these self-care measures:
You're likely to start by seeing your primary care provider. Or you may be referred to a specialist in skin diseases (dermatologist).
Here is information to help you get ready for your appointment and to know what to expect from your health care provider.
List your symptoms, when they occurred, and how long they lasted. Also, list all medicines, vitamins and herbs you're taking. Or take the original bottles and a written list of the dosages and directions.
List questions to ask your health care provider. For itchy skin, questions you may want to ask include:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions you have.
Your health care provider is likely to begin with your medical history and to ask you some questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.