A physical exam is the first step to diagnosing rotator cuff injuries. During the exam, a healthcare professional will press on different parts of the affected shoulder and move the arm into different positions. They'll also test the strength of the muscles around the shoulder and in the arms.
Imaging tests also may help diagnose rotator cuff injuries. Imaging tests may include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your rotator cuff injury-related health concerns
					Start Here


Conservative treatments — such as rest, ice and physical therapy — sometimes are all that's needed to recover from a rotator cuff injury. If your injury is severe, you might need surgery.
Physical therapy is usually one of the first treatments suggested. Exercises tailored to the specific location of your rotator cuff injury can help restore flexibility and strength to your shoulder. Physical therapy also is an important part of the recovery process after rotator cuff surgery.
An injection into the shoulder joint might be helpful. Injections are especially helpful if the pain is interfering with sleep, daily activities or physical therapy. While such shots often provide temporarily relief, they also can weaken the tendon and reduce the success of future shoulder surgery.
During an arthroscopic repair of a rotator cuff tendon, the surgeon inserts a tiny camera and tools through small incisions in the shoulder.
During an arthroscopic repair of a rotator cuff tendon, the surgeon inserts a tiny camera and tools through small incisions in the shoulder.
Many different types of surgeries are available for rotator cuff injuries, including:
The rotator cuff is a group of muscles and tendons that hold the shoulder joint in place and allow you to move your arm and shoulder. Problems occur when part of the rotator cuff becomes irritated or damaged. This can result in pain, weakness and reduced range of motion.
Sometimes one or more tendons become detached from the bone. In some cases, a surgeon can reattach the tendon to the bone using a thread-like material called a suture.
But sometimes the tendon is too badly damaged to be reattached. In that case, the surgeon may consider a "tendon transfer." This is a procedure in which a tendon from a different location is used to repair the rotator cuff.
The tendon most commonly transferred is the latissimus dorsi tendon in the back. For a latissimus dorsi transfer, the surgeon makes two incisions: one in the back and one in the front of the shoulder.
In the back, the surgeon detaches one end of a latissimus dorsi tendon and attaches a suture to that end. In the front, the surgeon creates a flap in the deltoid muscle, which covers the shoulder. He or she inserts a tool to grasp the end of the latissimus dorsi tendon. The surgeon brings the tendon under the deltoid to its new position.
Sutures are used to connect the transferred tendon to any remaining rotator cuff as well as bone. The surgeon tightens the sutures to pull the tendon against the bone and ties it securely in place. In some cases, anchors are inserted into the bone to help hold the sutures in place.
The surgeon closes the flap in the deltoid muscle. The incisions are then closed in the front and back.
The rotator cuff is a group of muscles and tendons that hold the shoulder joint in place and allow you to move your arm and shoulder. Problems with the rotator cuff may cause weakness or pain and restrict movement. It may also cause damage to the shoulder joint.
Often, tendons can be repaired. However, if the tendons are severely damaged, an operation called reverse shoulder replacement may be a better way to improve the joint's function and reduce pain, especially if the joint is affected by arthritis.
This operation is also called reverse arthroplasty. "Arthro" means joint; "plasty" means to mold surgically.
The top of the arm bone fits into a socket on the shoulder blade. In a typical shoulder replacement, a plastic lining is attached to the socket to allow smooth movement. The surgeon removes the top of the arm bone and inserts a metal stem with a ball on the end. However, if the rotator cuff is severely damaged, the joint may not be stable or work properly.
In a reverse shoulder replacement, the normal ball-and-socket structure is reversed. An artificial ball is attached to the shoulder blade. An artificial socket is attached to the top of the arm bone. The large deltoid muscle that covers the shoulder is typically able to move the arm.
General anesthesia will be given so you will sleep through the surgery.
An incision or cut is made in the front of the arm and shoulder. The surgeon separates muscles and cuts through tissue to expose the joint.
The upper arm bone is removed from the socket. The top of the arm bone is cut off and prepared to receive an artificial part. The socket is also prepared. A plate is screwed to the socket and a half-sphere attached. The metal stem is inserted in the arm bone, and a plastic socket is attached to the top.
The new socket is fitted against the new ball to allow smooth movement. The tissue is sewn together around the joint, and the incision is closed.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
The pain from a minor rotator cuff injury often diminishes on its own, with proper care. Stop doing what caused the pain and try to avoid painful movements. Limit heavy lifting or overhead activity until the shoulder pain subsides. Icing the shoulder may help it feel better. Over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) also may be helpful.
You'll probably start by seeing your family healthcare professional or sports medicine physician. If your injury is severe, you might be referred to an orthopedic surgeon. If you've been treated for a similar problem in the past, you may need to bring past records and imaging studies with you to your appointment.
Before the appointment, you might want to write a list that answers the following questions:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you a number of questions. Being ready to answer them may reserve time to go over any points you want to spend more time on. Your doctor may ask:

Rotator cuff injury care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.