Symptoms of cerebral palsy can become more apparent over time. A diagnosis might not be made until a few months to a year after birth. If symptoms are mild, diagnosis may be delayed longer.
If cerebral palsy is suspected, a health care professional evaluates your child's symptoms. The health care professional also reviews your child's medical history, conducts a physical exam and monitors your child's growth and development during appointments.
Your child may be referred to specialists trained in treating children with brain and nervous system conditions. Specialists include pediatric neurologists, pediatric physical medicine and rehabilitation specialists, and child development specialists.
Your child also might need a series of tests to make a diagnosis and rule out other possible causes.
Brain-imaging tests can reveal areas of damage or irregular brain development. These tests might include the following:
If your child is suspected of having seizures, an EEG can evaluate the condition further. Seizures can develop in a child with epilepsy. In an EEG test, a series of electrodes are attached to your child's scalp. The EEG records the electrical activity of your child's brain. Changes in brain wave patterns are common in epilepsy.
Tests of the blood, urine or skin might be used to screen for genetic or metabolic conditions.
If your child is diagnosed with cerebral palsy, your child likely will be referred to specialists to have tests for other conditions. These tests can look at:
The type of cerebral palsy is determined by the main movement condition that's present. However, several movement conditions can occur together.
After a diagnosis of cerebral palsy, your health care professional may use a rating scale tool such as the Gross Motor Function Classification System. This tool measures function, mobility, posture and balance. This information can help in selecting treatments.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your cerebral palsy-related health concerns
					Start Here


Children and adults with cerebral palsy may require lifelong care with a health care team. Your child's health care professional and a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist may oversee your child's care. Your child also may see a pediatric neurologist, therapists and mental health specialists. These experts give special attention to needs and issues that are more common in people with cerebral palsy. They work together with your child's health care professional. Together you can develop a treatment plan.
There is no cure for cerebral palsy. However, there are many treatment options that may help improve your child's daily functioning. Selecting care depends on your child's specific symptoms and needs, which may change over time. Early intervention can improve outcomes.
Treatment options can include medicines, therapies, surgical procedures and other treatments as needed.
Medicines that can lessen muscle tightness might be used to improve functional abilities. They also can treat pain and manage complications related to spasticity or other symptoms.
Muscle or nerve injections. To treat tightening of a specific muscle, your health care professional might recommend injections of onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox), or another agent. The injections are repeated about every three months.
Side effects can include pain at the injection site and mild flu-like symptoms. Other side effects include trouble breathing and swallowing.
Oral muscle relaxants. Medicines such as baclofen (Fleqsuvy, Ozobax, Lyvispah), tizanidine (Zanaflex), diazepam (Valium,Diazepam Intensol) or dantrolene (Dantrium) are often used to relax muscles.
Sometimes baclofen is pumped into the spinal cord with a tube, known as intrathecal baclofen. The pump is surgically implanted under the skin of the stomach.
Talk to your health care professional about benefits and risks of medicines.
A variety of therapies play an important role in treating cerebral palsy:
Physical therapy. Muscle training and exercises can help your child's strength, flexibility, balance, motor development and mobility. A physical therapist also teaches you how to safely care for your child's everyday needs at home. This can include bathing and feeding your child. The therapist can provide guidance on how you can continue muscle training and exercise with your child at home between therapy visits.
For the first 1 to 2 years after birth, both physical and occupational therapists work on issues such as head and trunk control, rolling, and grasping. Later, both types of therapists are involved in wheelchair assessments.
Braces, splints or other supportive devices might be recommended. They may help with function, such as improved walking, and stretching stiff muscles.
Surgery may be needed to lessen muscle tightness or correct bone changes caused by spasticity. These treatments include:
Medicines and other treatments may be recommended for seizures, pain, osteoporosis or mental health conditions. Treatments also may be needed to help with sleep, oral health, feeding and nutrition, bladder incontinence, vision, or hearing.
As a child with cerebral palsy becomes an adult, health care needs can change. Children with cerebral palsy need general health screenings recommended for all adults. But they also need ongoing health care for conditions that are more common in adults with cerebral palsy. These can include:
Some children and teenagers with cerebral palsy use complementary and alternative medicine. Alternative therapies are not proved and have not been adopted into routine clinical practice. If you're considering a complementary and alternative medicine or therapy, talk with your child's health care professional about potential risks and benefits.
When a child is diagnosed with a disabling condition, the whole family faces new challenges. Here are a few tips for caring for your child and yourself:
Caring for your adult loved one with cerebral palsy may include planning for current and future lifestyle needs, such as:
If your child has cerebral palsy, your child's health care professional may ask about your child's symptoms and when they started. The health professional also may ask if you had risk factors during pregnancy or delivery.
Take a relative or friend with you, if possible, to help you remember the information you receive.
Questions to ask a health care professional can include:
Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your health care professional is likely to ask you questions, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.