Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Vaccines can protect your health. Find out more about the vaccines that are recommended for adults.
You may think that because you're not a kid anymore, you don't have to worry about getting shots. But adults need them too. Here's what to know about vaccines for adults.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends vaccines for adults based on the following:
To gather information about vaccinations you've had, talk to your parents or other caregivers, if possible. Ask if they have records of the vaccinations you received when you were a child. You also can check with your healthcare professional's office to see if they have your vaccination records on file.
In some situations, you may need to check with healthcare organizations where you received care when you were younger. Or it may be helpful to check with your schools or employers who required vaccinations. You also could contact your state health department to see if it has a registry that includes adult immunizations.
Talk to your healthcare professional about your specific needs. Vaccines you may need as an adult include:
Hepatitis B. The CDC recommends all adults ages 19 to 59 receive the hepatitis B vaccine. The vaccine also is recommended for adults 60 and older who have risk factors for hepatitis B.
This vaccine is not specifically recommended for people 60 and older who don't have known risk factors. But if you are in that group, you may receive the hepatitis B vaccine if you want it. Hepatitis B is a disease that affects the liver.
Human papillomavirus (HPV). The CDC recommends the HPV vaccine for children at ages 11 or 12. But if you didn't receive the HPV vaccine at that time, you can get it later as a teen or as a young adult. It's recommended for everyone through age 26.
The HPV vaccine also may be useful for some adults ages 27 through 45. If you're in that age group and you haven't received the HPV vaccine, talk to your healthcare professional to see if it might be right for you. HPV is a common virus that can cause cancer.
Tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis (Tdap). One dose of Tdap is routinely given at age 11 or 12. If you've never had a Tdap vaccine, the CDC recommends getting it as soon as possible. One dose of Tdap vaccine also is recommended during each pregnancy, ideally between weeks 27 and 36.
Tdap can protect you from lockjaw, which also is called tetanus; whooping cough, which also is called pertussis; and diphtheria, which can lead to breathing problems. A Tdap booster shot is recommended every 10 years.
To help you keep track of your vaccines, ask your healthcare professional for an immunization record form. Bring the form with you to all your healthcare visits. Ask a member of your care team to sign and date the form for each vaccine you receive.

                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
            
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Ian Roth: Aging is inevitable, and parts of the process can be unpleasant.
Gregory Poland, M.D., Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic: "As you get older, your immune system gets weaker. That's why we see more severe infections in older people."
Ian Roth: Dr. Gregory Poland, who heads up the Mayo Clinic Vaccine Research Group, says it's why vaccines become especially important as you get older. And it's why his team at Mayo Clinic looks for ways to tailor vaccines to better protect older people.
Dr. Poland: "There are three influenza vaccines, one shingles vaccine, and one hepatitis B vaccine that have been designed around those issues and that work better than the standard vaccines in older people."
Ian Roth: He says it's important to note that these vaccines aren't perfect and won't always prevent you from getting an illness, but they do protect you from complications from illnesses like the flu.
Dr. Poland: "So you might have had sniffles or fever. You were home for a day or two from work, but you didn't get hospitalized. You didn't get pneumonia. And you didn't die."
Ian Roth: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Ian Roth.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.