Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A healthy pregnancy diet will promote your baby's growth and development. Understand which nutrients you need most and where to find them.
During pregnancy, the basic principles of healthy eating remain the same — get plenty of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean protein and healthy fats. However, a few nutrients in a pregnancy diet deserve special attention. Here's what tops the list.
Folate is a B vitamin that helps prevent serious conditions called neural tube defects that can be present in babies at birth. The lab-made form of folate found in supplements and fortified foods is known as folic acid. Folic acid can help lower the risk of a baby being born too early, before the 37th week of pregnancy. This is called premature birth. Folic acid also can help lower the risk of a baby weighing less than is typical at birth. This is known as having a low birth weight.
How much you need: 400 micrograms (mcg) a day of folate or folic acid before becoming pregnant, and 600 to 1,000 micrograms of folate or folic acid a day throughout pregnancy 
Good sources: Fortified cereals are great sources of folic acid. Dark green, leafy vegetables, citrus fruits, and dried beans, peas and lentils are good sources of naturally occurring folate.
Along with making healthy food choices, taking a daily prenatal vitamin can help you get enough of this essential nutrient. It's ideal to start taking a prenatal vitamin at least three months before a pregnancy. Anyone who might become pregnant should take a daily vitamin supplement that has folic acid in it.
You and your baby need calcium for strong bones and teeth. Calcium also helps nerves, muscles and blood vessels work as they should.
How much you need: 1,000 milligrams (mg) a day; pregnant teenagers need 1,300 mg a day
Good sources: The body absorbs calcium best from dairy products. Other calcium sources include broccoli and kale. Many fruit juices and breakfast cereals are fortified with calcium too.
Vitamin D works with calcium to help build your baby's bones and teeth.
How much you need: 600 international units (IU) a day
Good sources: Fatty fish, such as salmon, is a great source of vitamin D. Other options include fortified milk and orange juice.
Protein is crucial for the growth of your unborn baby, also called a fetus.
Good sources: Lean meat, poultry, seafood and eggs are great sources of protein. Other options include beans and peas, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
The body uses iron to make a protein in red blood cells called hemoglobin. Hemoglobin carries oxygen to the body's tissues. During pregnancy, you need double the amount of iron that people who aren't pregnant need. Your body needs this iron to make more blood to supply oxygen to the fetus.
If you don't get enough iron during pregnancy, that can raise your risk of a condition called iron deficiency anemia. Symptoms of iron deficiency anemia can include headache and extreme tiredness. If this condition becomes serious during pregnancy, it also raises the risk of: 
How much you need: 27 milligrams (mg) a day
Good sources: Lean red meat, poultry and fish are good sources of iron. Other options include iron-fortified breakfast cereals, beans and vegetables.
Prenatal vitamins usually have iron in them. But healthcare professionals sometimes recommend taking an additional iron supplement.
The iron from animal products, such as meat, is most easily absorbed. To help your body absorb iron from plant sources and supplements, pair them with a food or drink high in vitamin C. Good sources of vitamin C include orange juice, tomato juice and strawberries. If you take iron supplements with orange juice, don't drink the type of orange juice that's fortified with calcium. Calcium is an essential nutrient during pregnancy, but it can lower the amount of iron that the body absorbs.
Even if you eat a healthy diet, you can miss out on key nutrients. Taking a daily prenatal vitamin can help fill any gaps. Your healthcare professional may recommend special supplements if you follow a strict vegetarian diet or have a long-term health condition. If you're thinking about taking an herbal supplement during pregnancy, talk with your healthcare professional first. Some herbal supplements might be harmful to your pregnancy. 

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.