Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Do you know the typical signs of labor? Understand the changes your body will go through as you prepare to give birth.
In the movies, babies often are born quickly and in dramatic fashion. A pregnant person doubles over from the pain of a single contraction, and suddenly a baby appears. In reality, however, labor usually takes time. And the early signs of labor may not be obvious. Here's what to know about the common signs of the body getting ready for labor.
The lower part of the uterus is called the cervix. Before labor, the cervix is typically 3.5 to 4 centimeters long. As early labor begins, the cervix starts to soften, shorten and thin. That process is called effacement. At this point in labor, you might feel mild contractions that come and go. Or you may feel nothing at all.
Effacement often is talked about in percentages. At 0% effacement, the cervix is at least 2 centimeters long. That means it's still very thick. The cervix must be completely thinned out — 100% effaced — before a vaginal delivery.
Another sign of early labor is the cervix beginning to open. That's called dilation. Dilation is measured in centimeters from zero to 10. At zero there's no dilation. At 10 centimeters, the cervix is fully dilated.
At first, these cervical changes can be very slow. Once you're in active labor — when the cervix is open 6 centimeters or more — expect to dilate more quickly.
During pregnancy, a thick plug of mucus blocks the opening of the cervix to keep bacteria from entering the uterus. During the late third trimester, this plug might move into the vagina. As a result, you may notice an increase in vaginal discharge that's clear, pink or slightly bloody. This may happen several days before labor begins or at the start of labor.
If you have vaginal bleeding that is as heavy as a typical menstrual period, contact a member of your healthcare team right away. Heavy vaginal bleeding could be a sign of a problem.
Lightening or engagement are the terms used to describe when the baby's head settles deep into the pelvis. This might cause a change in the shape of a pregnant person's belly, which may feel lighter with the baby lower in the pelvis. This change can happen anywhere from a few weeks to a few hours before labor begins.
The amniotic sac is a fluid-filled membrane that cushions a baby in the uterus. At the beginning of or during labor, the membranes rupture. This also is called water breaking.
When your water breaks, you might have a trickle of small amounts of fluid from your vagina. Or there may be a more obvious gush of fluid. If your water breaks, contact your healthcare team right away, and go to your hospital or birthing center. Do this even if you're not sure whether the fluid is amniotic fluid, urine or something else.
Once your water breaks, timing becomes important. If labor hasn't started already, the longer it takes for labor to start after your water breaks, the greater the risk of you or your baby getting an infection. Your healthcare team might suggest taking steps to start your contractions before labor begins on its own. That process is called labor induction.
Contractions are a feeling that the uterus is tightening and relaxing. During the last few months of pregnancy, you might notice mild contractions from time to time. These are called Braxton Hicks contractions. They don't signal the start of labor.
Use the following questions to help tell the difference between Braxton Hicks contractions and labor contractions:
No one knows for sure what triggers labor. Your experience is unique. Sometimes it's hard to tell when labor begins.
Don't hesitate to call your healthcare professional if you're confused about whether you're in labor. Preterm labor can be especially sneaky. If you have any signs of labor before 37 weeks — especially if you also notice blood from your vagina — contact your healthcare professional right away.
If you go to your hospital or birthing center thinking you're in labor, only to find out you're not, try not to feel embarrassed or frustrated. Think of it as a practice run.

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.