Hyperbaric oxygen therapy increases delivery of oxygen to the body by providing pure oxygen in an enclosed space with higher than normal air pressure.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy treats a condition called decompression sickness that's caused by rapid drops in water pressure in scuba diving or air pressure in air or space travel. Other conditions treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy include serious tissue disease or wounds, trapped air bubbles in blood vessels, carbon monoxide poisoning, and tissue damage from radiation therapy.
The goal of hyperbaric oxygen therapy is to get more oxygen to tissues damaged by disease, injury or other factors. In a hyperbaric oxygen therapy chamber, the air pressure is increased 2 to 3 times higher than normal air pressure. The lungs can gather much more oxygen than would be possible breathing pure oxygen at normal air pressure.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is used to treat multiple conditions.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is generally a safe procedure. Most complications are mild and do not last. Serious complications are rare. The risk of complications increases with longer and repeated therapies.
Increased air pressure or the pure oxygen can result in the following:
Uncommon, more-serious complications include:
Some people may experience anxiety while being in an enclosed space, also called claustrophobia.
Oxygen-rich environments increase the risk of fires. Certified programs that provide hyperbaric oxygen therapy must follow guidelines to prevent fires.
Steps to lessen certain side effects include the following.
Your healthcare team will provide instructions on how to prepare for hyperbaric oxygen therapy. You'll be given a hospital-approved gown or scrubs to wear in place of regular clothing during the procedure.
For fire prevention, items such as lighters or battery-powered devices that generate heat are not allowed in the hyperbaric chamber. You also will be asked not to wear or use any hair or skin care products such as lip balm, lotion, makeup or hair spray.
In general, you should not take anything into a chamber unless a member of your healthcare team says it's OK.
In an individual hyperbaric oxygen unit, a person rests inside a clear plastic tube and receives treatment. This chamber also is called a monoplace hyperbaric oxygen chamber.
In an individual hyperbaric oxygen unit, a person rests inside a clear plastic tube and receives treatment. This chamber also is called a monoplace hyperbaric oxygen chamber.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy also can be given to more than one person in a large room. In this case, each person gets oxygen through a lightweight, clear hood.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy also can be given to more than one person in a large room. In this case, each person gets oxygen through a lightweight, clear hood.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy typically is performed as an outpatient procedure, but it also can be provided while you are hospitalized.
In general, there are two types of hyperbaric oxygen chambers:
The treatment effects of hyperbaric oxygen therapy are the same in monoplace and multiplace chambers.
For most conditions, hyperbaric oxygen therapy lasts 1 1/2 to 2 hours. Members of your healthcare team will monitor you throughout your treatment.
Your therapy team assesses you, including looking in your ears and taking your blood pressure and pulse. Once the team decides you are ready, you can get dressed and leave.
You may feel somewhat tired or hungry following your treatment. This doesn't limit your typical activities.
The number of sessions depends on your medical condition. Some conditions, such as carbon monoxide poisoning, might be treated with a few sessions. Other conditions, such as nonhealing wounds, may require 40 treatment sessions or more.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is often a part of a broader treatment plan that includes other medical or surgical specialists.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.