In general, a diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is made if the core symptoms of ADHD start early in life — before age 12 — and create major problems at home and at school on an ongoing basis.
There's no specific test for ADHD. An evaluation can help find out whether symptoms are related to ADHD or another problem. Making a diagnosis will likely include:
Signs of ADHD can sometimes be noticed in preschoolers or even younger children. But diagnosing the condition in very young children is harder. That's because developmental conditions such as language delays can be mistaken for ADHD.
Children preschool age or younger suspected of having ADHD are more likely to need evaluation by a specialist, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist, speech pathologist, or developmental pediatrician.
Some medical conditions or their treatments may cause symptoms much like those of ADHD. Examples include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children-related health concerns
					Start Here


Standard treatments for ADHD in children include medicines, behavior therapy, counseling and education services. These treatments can lessen many of the symptoms of ADHD, but they don't cure it. Treatment also can help prevent some complications caused by ADHD. It may take some time to find what works best for your child.
Stimulant medicines, also called psychostimulants, are currently the most prescribed medicines for ADHD. Stimulants appear to boost and balance levels of brain chemicals called neurotransmitters. The medicines help lessen the symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity. They can sometimes help in a short period of time.
Stimulant medicines are available in short-acting and long-acting forms. Long-acting patches of methylphenidate (Daytrana) or dextroamphetamine (Xelstrym) are available. They can be worn on the hip.
The right dose varies from child to child, so it may take time to find what works for your child. And the dose may need to be adjusted if side effects occur or as your child matures. Ask your healthcare professional about possible side effects of stimulant medicines.
Some research suggests that using ADHD stimulant medicines with certain heart problems may be a concern. Weight and growth may be affected. Also, the risk of certain mental health symptoms may be higher when using stimulant medicines.
Medicines that are sometimes called nonstimulants have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, also called the FDA, to treat ADHD. These include:
Antidepressants, such as bupropion (Aplenzin, Wellbutrin XL, others), are not specifically approved by the FDA to treat ADHD. But they may be effective if other medicines haven't worked or have too many side effects.
Atomoxetine and antidepressants work slower than stimulant medicines do and may take several weeks to show a full effect. These may be good options if your child can't take stimulant medicine because of health conditions or severe side effects.
Although not proved, concerns have been raised that there may be a slightly higher risk of suicidal thinking in children and teenagers taking atomoxetine, viloxazine or antidepressants. Contact your child's healthcare professional right away if you notice any signs of depression or suicidal thinking.
It's very important to make sure your child takes the right amount of the prescribed medicine. Parents may be concerned about stimulant medicines and the risk of misuse and addiction. Stimulant medicines are considered safe when your child takes the medicine as prescribed by the healthcare professional. Your child should see the healthcare professional regularly to decide if the dose of the medicine needs to be adjusted.
There is concern that other people might misuse stimulant medicines prescribed for children and teenagers with ADHD. To keep your child's medicine safe and to make sure your child is getting the right dose at the right time:
Children with ADHD often benefit from behavior therapy, social skills training, parent skills training and counseling. These may be provided by a psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker or other mental health professional. Some children with ADHD also may have other mental health conditions such as anxiety or depression. Counseling may help both ADHD and the other condition.
The best results happen when a team approach is used. Your child's team may include teachers, parents, therapists and healthcare professionals working together. Learn about ADHD and available services. Work with your child's teachers and refer them to trusted sources of information to support their efforts in the classroom.
The FDA has approved two devices for ADHD. They both need a prescription.
These devices have FDA approval, but they are new and have limited evidence and data to guide treatment. If you're considering these devices, it's important to talk with your healthcare professional about precautions, expectations and possible side effects. Get complete information and instructions from your healthcare professional.
Your child should see a healthcare professional regularly while being treated for ADHD. If symptoms are much better and stable, visits usually take place every 3 to 6 months.
Contact the healthcare professional if your child has any medicine side effects, such as loss of appetite, trouble sleeping or worse irritability. Also contact the healthcare professional if your child's ADHD symptoms are not getting better with the current treatment.
Because ADHD is complex and each person with ADHD is different, it's hard to make recommendations that work for every child. But some of the following suggestions may help create an environment in which your child can succeed.
Learn all you can about ADHD and opportunities to help your child be successful. You are your child's best support.
Ask about school programs. Schools are required by law to have programs that give support to children who have a disability that interferes with learning. Your child may be eligible for extra services offered under federal laws: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).
These extra services can include evaluation, changes in coursework, changes in classroom setup, changes in teaching methods, study skills instruction, use of computers, and more interaction between parents and teachers. These education services can be written in your child's education plan, called an individualized education plan. Another name for this plan is IEP.
Alternative medicine means using another approach instead of standard medical care. Complementary medicine means using alternative medicine along with standard medical care. This mix is sometimes called integrative medicine.
There's little research that shows that alternative or complementary medicine can lessen ADHD symptoms. If you're thinking about trying alternative medicine, talk with your child's healthcare professional first to decide if the therapy is safe and effective. Some alternative medicine treatments that have been tried but are not yet fully proved scientifically include:
Special diets. Most diets promoted for ADHD involve not eating foods thought to worsen hyperactivity, such as sugar, and foods that are common allergens, such as wheat, milk and eggs. Some diets recommend staying away from artificial food colorings and additives. So far, studies haven't found a consistent link between diet and fewer symptoms of ADHD.
Also, limiting foods may keep children from getting a healthy well-balanced diet. Some evidence based on individual reports or personal experience suggests diet changes might make a difference in children with specific food sensitivities. Using caffeine as a stimulant for children with ADHD can have risky effects and is not recommended.
Caring for a child with ADHD can be challenging for the whole family. Caregivers may be distressed by their child's behavior as well as by the way other people respond. The stress of dealing with ADHD can lead to conflict in a marriage or partnership. These problems can be made worse by the financial burden that ADHD can place on families.
Siblings of a child with ADHD also may have a hard time. They can be affected by a sibling who is demanding or aggressive. They also may get less attention because the child with ADHD requires so much of a parent's time.
Many resources are available, such as social services and support groups. Support groups can offer helpful information about coping with ADHD. Ask your child's healthcare professional about support groups in your area.
There also are excellent books and guides for both parents and teachers, as well as internet sites dealing with ADHD. Be careful with websites or other resources that give advice that's risky or not proved or doesn't match your healthcare team's recommendations.
Many parents notice patterns in their child's behavior and in their own responses to that behavior. Both you and your child may need to change behavior. But changing new habits for old ones takes a lot of hard work.
Be realistic in your expectations for improvement — both your own and your child's. Also keep your child's developmental stage in mind. Set small goals for both yourself and your child. Don't try to make a lot of changes all at once.
You're likely to start by taking your child to a pediatrician or family healthcare professional. Depending on the results of the evaluation, your healthcare professional may refer you to a specialist, such as a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, psychologist, psychiatrist or pediatric neurologist.
Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your healthcare professional may ask you questions, such as:
Be ready to answer questions so you have time to talk about what's most important to you.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.