Atrial flutter is a type of heart rhythm disorder. The heart's upper chambers, called the atria, beat too quickly.
Atrial flutter is a type of heart rhythm disorder. The heart's upper chambers, called the atria, beat too quickly.
Atrial flutter is a type of heart rhythm disorder, called an arrhythmia. It is similar to atrial fibrillation (AFib). But in atrial flutter the heart rhythm is more organized and less chaotic than in AFib. A person can have both atrial flutter and AFib.
Atrial flutter may not cause symptoms. But some people may have a pounding, rapid heartbeat and chest pain. Fainting or almost fainting also may happen. Treatment for atrial flutter may include medicines and a heart procedure.
People with atrial flutter may not have symptoms. The irregular heartbeat may be found during a health checkup for another reason.
If atrial flutter symptoms happen, they may include:
If you feel like your heart is pounding, fluttering, skipping a beat or beating too fast, make an appointment for a health checkup. You may be told to see a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.
Get emergency medical care if you have these symptoms:
Always call 911 or your local emergency number if you think you might be having a heart attack.
Changes in the heart's electrical system cause atrial flutter. The heart's electrical system controls the heartbeat. Some health conditions or heart surgery can change how electrical signals travel through the heart and cause atrial flutter.
The movement of the heart's signals make the heart squeeze and pump blood. Usually, this process goes smoothly. The typical resting heart rate is about 60 to 100 beats a minute. But in atrial flutter, the heart's upper chambers beat too quickly. This causes the heart to beat in a fast, but usually organized, way.
Some health conditions increase the risk of atrial flutter. They include:
Other risk factors for atrial flutter are:
A complication of atrial flutter is atrial fibrillation (AFib). About half of people with atrial flutter get AFib within three years. AFib increases the risk of blood clots and strokes.
Other complications of atrial flutter are:
Lifestyle changes help keep the heart healthy. Try these heart-healthy tips:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.