An endoscopy procedure involves inserting a long, flexible tube called an endoscope down your throat and into your esophagus. A tiny camera on the end of the endoscope allows views of your esophagus, stomach and the beginning of your small intestine, called the duodenum.
An endoscopy procedure involves inserting a long, flexible tube called an endoscope down your throat and into your esophagus. A tiny camera on the end of the endoscope allows views of your esophagus, stomach and the beginning of your small intestine, called the duodenum.
During a capsule endoscopy procedure, you swallow a tiny camera that's about the size of a large vitamin pill. The capsule contains lights to illuminate your digestive system, a camera to take images and an antenna that sends those images to a recorder you wear on a belt.
During a capsule endoscopy procedure, you swallow a tiny camera that's about the size of a large vitamin pill. The capsule contains lights to illuminate your digestive system, a camera to take images and an antenna that sends those images to a recorder you wear on a belt.
Many people with celiac disease don't know they have it. Two blood tests can help diagnose it:
It's important to be tested for celiac disease before trying a gluten-free diet. Eliminating gluten from your diet might make the results of blood tests appear in the standard range.
If the results of these tests indicate celiac disease, one of the following tests will likely be ordered:
If you might have dermatitis herpetiformis, your healthcare professional may take a small sample of skin tissue to examine under a microscope.
If you're diagnosed with celiac disease, additional testing may be recommended to check your nutritional status. This includes levels of vitamins A, B-12, D and E, as well as mineral levels, hemoglobin and liver enzymes. Your bone health also may be checked with a bone density scan.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your celiac disease-related health concerns
					Start Here


A strict, lifelong gluten-free diet is the only way to manage celiac disease. Besides wheat, foods that contain gluten include:
A dietitian who works with people with celiac disease can help you plan a healthy gluten-free diet. Even trace amounts of gluten in your diet can be damaging, even if they don't cause symptoms.
Gluten can be hidden in foods, medicines and nonfood products, including:
Removing gluten from your diet will typically reduce inflammation in your small intestine, causing you to feel better and eventually heal. Children tend to heal more quickly than adults.
If your anemia or nutritional deficiencies are severe, supplements may be recommended, including:
Vitamins and supplements are usually taken in pill form. If your digestive tract has trouble absorbing vitamins, you might be able to get them by injection.
Medical follow-up at regular intervals can ensure that your symptoms have responded to a gluten-free diet. Your healthcare team may monitor your response with blood tests. Nutritional markers also are checked regularly.
For most people with celiac disease, eating a gluten-free diet allows the small intestine to heal. For children, that usually takes 3 to 6 months. For adults, complete healing might take several years.
If you continue to have symptoms or if symptoms recur, you might need an endoscopy with biopsies to find out whether your intestine has healed.
If your small intestine is severely damaged or you have refractory celiac disease, steroids may be recommended to control inflammation. Steroids can ease severe symptoms of celiac disease while the intestine heals.
Other medicines, such as azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran) or budesonide (Entocort EC, Uceris), might be used.
If you have this skin rash, a medicine called dapsone may be recommended in addition to a gluten-free diet. Dapsone is taken by mouth. If you take dapsone, you'll need regular blood tests to check for side effects.
With refractory celiac disease, the small intestine doesn't heal. Refractory celiac disease can be quite serious, and there is currently no proven treatment. If you have refractory celiac disease, you may want to seek medical care at a specialized center.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you've been diagnosed with celiac disease, you'll need to avoid all foods that contain gluten. Ask your healthcare team for a referral to a dietitian, who can help you plan a healthy gluten-free diet.
Avoid packaged foods unless they're labeled as gluten-free or have no gluten-containing ingredients, including emulsifiers and stabilizers that can contain gluten. In addition to cereals, pastas and baked goods, other packaged foods that can contain gluten include:
Pure oats aren't harmful for most people with celiac disease, but oats can be contaminated by wheat during growing and processing. Ask your healthcare team if you can try eating small amounts of pure oat products.
Many basic foods are allowed in a gluten-free diet, including:
Grains and starches allowed in a gluten-free diet include:
It can be a challenge to follow a completely gluten-free diet. Here are some ways to help you cope and to feel more in control.
You might be referred to a doctor who treats digestive diseases, called a gastroenterologist. Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment.
Until your appointment, continue eating your usual diet. Cutting gluten before you're tested for celiac disease can change the test results.
For celiac disease, questions to ask include:
You may be asked the following questions:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.