Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Nutrition & Fitness / The sweet truth: All about sugar
Sugar – particularly added sugar – is in nearly all of our food. Whether you have a sweet tooth or not, it’s important to know the benefits and consequences of all three kinds of sugar, and how we can adjust our relationship to them.
On this episode of On Nutrition, we talk with dietitian-nutritionist Lisa Lammert about the history of added sugar, whether it’s possible to have a sugar addiction, and if sugar substitutes are as effective as we might think.
Listen to The sweet truth: All about sugar
Tara Schmidt: This is “On Nutrition,” a podcast from Mayo Clinic, where we dig into the latest nutrition trends and research to help you understand what’s health and what’s hype. I’m Tara Schmidt, a registered dietitian with Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. This episode, sugar.
I know, I know. It seems impossible to escape all the sugar in our modern world. But whether you have a sweet tooth or not, it’s important to know what sugar does in our bodies – and how we can adjust our relationship with it. My guest today is Lisa Lammert. A registered dietitian nutritionist working at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. Lisa works in the Healthy Living Program with a wide variety of patients in the outpatient setting. Thank you for being with me today, Lisa.
Lisa Lammert: Absolutely. Happy to be here.
Tara Schmidt: Our topic is sugar, period. All things sugar, which I think is very timely, just given the status of the American population and our food supply. I’m super excited to learn more from you today.
Tara Schmidt: We’ll be talking about all types of sugar today. But let’s start off with added sugar, which seems to be in everything, even things you might not expect. So we’re going to play a game called, “Does it have added sugar or not?”
Tara Schmidt: I was going to say, that’s a caveat. Depends if it’s sweetened or unsweetened.
Lisa Lammert: Exactly. Unsweetened, no. The originals or vanilla-flavored, yes.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah! Why the originals? That’s so misleading.
Tara Schmidt: That’s why kids like baked beans. All in all, we can probably say that added sugar – And again, we are specifically talking about added sugar. In this conversation, I think that we should absolutely define added versus natural sugar – but added sugar is kind of in everything nowadays.
Tara Schmidt: Added sugar is in 75 percent of packaged foods. Why? What is it doing in our entire food supply?
Lisa Lammert: I was looking back at this and when we think back a couple hundred years ago, the start of the 19th century, that’s really when we saw modern industrialization in our food supply. And that, some of the processes then really allowed sugar to be produced in mass amounts and very cheaply.
Lisa Lammert: And at that time we had a population of workers that needed cheap calories. They were burning a lot of energy. They needed it. And then there were other factors too: coffees and teas. People were using more sugar to kind of counteract the bitterness of those drinks.
Things like chocolate, candies, confectionaries, all of those became more popular too. And it just never really stopped.
Tara Schmidt: And let’s break down the different types, right? Do you want to go through them? Let’s call it three categories.
Added sugar; naturally occurring sugar; and then we’ve also got artificial sweeteners. Let’s talk about those three.
Lisa Lammert: Yeah, I love that. I think it’s really important to make those distinctions. And often when I’m talking with patients I see, I tell them this term “sugar” is a very umbrella term. Because it encompasses natural sugars, added sugars, artificial sweeteners. And I think there’s a lot of confusion there.
Natural sugar: Those are going to be the naturally occurring sugars that we find in typical whole foods, like the lactose that’s in milk; or the naturally occurring fruit sugar or fructose that would be in an apple; or some of the natural starches or carbohydrates that are in, say, rice or a potato or oats.
Added sugar, really what we’re talking about here, the sugar starts out from a natural source, like a sugar beet or corn. But it’s processed and it’s refined. And then that is what we kind of know of as table sugar, powdered sugar, corn syrups. That’s added to so many of these processed foods to give them a very sweet taste—and we know that can contribute excess calories.
Tara Schmidt: And what about the third category, artificial sweeteners?
Lisa Lammert: Those are chemical compounds that have been manufactured to taste like sugar. They’re very, very sweet in very, very small amounts.
And those are often what we see in diet drinks or sugar free foods. Things like aspartame, sucralose, stevia, those types of things.
Tara Schmidt: And something that’s important for me to distinguish for the people I educate are the impacts that these types of sugars or sweeteners have on the body. Do you want to talk about how they trigger different responses?
Lisa Lammert: Yes. I think that’s super important. When we’re eating these natural sugars, like an apple, we are still going to have a little bit of an increase in our blood sugar, but those foods have other components with them, typically. They’re going to have some fiber. Some of the foods might have some protein.
We’re not going to have that steep increase in blood sugar. We’re not going to have this large insulin response. Certainly if we’re having a donut or a regular soda, those added sugars are really going to give us a sharp rise in our blood sugar. And then sometimes a crash. The artificial sweeteners, we don’t see that impact on blood sugar.
However, there is a little bit of confusion that, even though they don’t impact blood sugar, sometimes they can add to more cravings or kind of an increased appetite later on. So there’s, pros and cons of those.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah, I will sometimes tell people, if you know anyone who has diabetes and they have ever experienced a hypoglycemic or low blood sugar episode – no one is telling them, “Hey, here’s an orange or here’s a piece of whole wheat bread.” And even though those things do increase your blood sugar, it’s not going to be fast enough. We give people who are in a hypoglycemic episode honey or regular juice or regular soda or skittles, if they can chew them.
Lisa Lammert: Yes. 100%. The other components are going to help really slow down the digestion. When somebody needs that sugar quickly, we want to pick something that’s very, very quick and easy to digest.
Tara Schmidt: Which is the argument of, we’re not going to vilify bananas. Let’s talk a little bit about cravings because I think that that is of interest to people. What I have come to accept – and I know physicians that we work with have differing opinions – is that most people kind of know how they’re going to react to an artificial sweetener.
An example would be, if you have a diet Coke in the middle of the day or a diet soda in the middle of the day because you’re kind of craving something sweet, “Oh, okay. That’s what I was looking for. I just really needed that sweet taste in my mouth. I feel great,” and can move on with their day.
Whereas other people, they’re kind of teased with that diet soda, but they don’t have a blood sugar rise that their body was expecting. And then they go out and cupboard search for something that is going to cause a blood sugar rise.
People fall into two different categories of whether or not they react to that artificial sweetener. What’s your opinion on cravings related to these different groups?
Lisa Lammert: I’ve seen the same thing in my patient population. Some people can have diet soda and be fine. And others, they have something with artificial sweetener and later on they’re just searching. It increases their appetite and their cravings for those sweet foods.
Looking aside from the artificially sweetened products, the regular added sugars, we really can crave those. And it’s almost like the more we have of them, the more we want of them. It keeps people coming back for more.
Tara Schmidt: We have to give the food industry credit for knowing how to make food taste good. When we talk so much about ultra processed foods, for example, there’s going to likely be added sugar and/or added fat, and/or salt that makes food taste good. But I think we’ve also become really, really used to all of this added sugar, added fat, added salt.
Then we have something that’s kind of bland, let’s say, “Ugh, this is, who put these bran flakes in my bowl? It’s just like cardboard.” But it’s really because we’re so used to the amount of added sugar, let’s say, or artificial sweeteners that are in our food supply.
Lisa Lammert: Yes, exactly. And I also find too, as people maybe do make an effort to decrease their sugar. Sometimes they go back and have something really sweet and they say, “Oh, oh my gosh, this is so sweet.” It takes time, but they do adapt to less, but it’s a bit of a process.
Tara Schmidt: We can probably agree that naturally occurring sugars are going to come from whole foods. We’ve got fruits and maybe starchy vegetables. Let’s talk about the argument between added sugar versus artificial sweeteners. How do you coach people on if they say, what should I be having?
Lisa Lammert: I hear that all the time and it’s a valid question and I don’t know that it’s a question that we have the right answer for but I think it’s best to try to limit both of them. I mean we know added sugars in large amounts are not great for our body, but we also know artificial sweeteners in large amounts are not great for our body. And they’re probably going to lead to some of those increased cravings later on in certain people.
And there’s also some interesting research that even though artificial sweeteners aren’t contributing calories like the added sugars are, people who are having them as a regular part of their diet tend to be higher BMI or more overweight. The bottom line is we really want to limit both of them.
Tara Schmidt: I will sometimes challenge people when they ask me that question and say, “Tell me what your initial habit is that we’re talking about. And tell me your ideas moving forward.” If you are a regular soda addict, and we’re working on weight management or calorie control, moving to diet soda, likely, again, mathematically, is going to help you shave off some calories.
Now we’ve switched from added sugar to artificial sweeteners, but in a perfect world, I eventually want you to move to sparkling water and no sugar of any kind. That either one and maybe you’re a diet soda addict and you want to get off the artificial sweeteners, that would be okay too. We’re very reasonable dieticians, you and I,
Lisa Lammert: Yes. I always tell patients, “Nutrition is a compared-to-what scenario.” Exactly what you just said.
Tara Schmidt: It can seem like sugar is in everything — so it can be helpful to know what kind of sugar we’re dealing with. There’s natural sugar, like lactose in milk, fructose in fruit, or starches in potatoes.
These can even be nutritious, especially when these foods contain fiber or protein. And for the most part, natural sugars are fine. We’re more concerned with added sugar. Added sugar comes from a natural source like sugar beets or corn. But during the processing of foods like ice cream or bread, added sugar gets – well, you guessed it – added in.
This type of sugar is in the majority of packaged foods. It’s manufactured to increase the sweetness of a product and have you coming back for more. And especially when a product doesn’t have fiber or protein, it can lead to an increase in your blood sugar and maybe even a crash. But the quick effect of added sugar can come in handy if you have diabetes and are experiencing low blood sugar.
Last, but not least, there’s non-nutritive or artificial sweeteners, or kind of that fake sugar that we have in a lot of our beverages — like stevia in your coffee or sucralose in a diet soda. While they usually don’t impact blood sugar, they could have an impact on cravings or appetites. If you’re working on weight management, we suggest that you limit your intake of both added sugar and artificial sweeteners.
Any decrease is moving in the right direction. Now let’s talk about when sugar can impact our health on a larger scale. Now there are some guidelines around limiting added sugar. How much is too much?
Lisa Lammert: When we look at the dietary guidelines for Americans, the recommendation there is to limit added sugars to less than 10 percent of our daily calories. For somebody on a 2000 calorie diet, that’s about 200 calories a day, or it works out to be 50 grams a day of added sugar, or about 12 teaspoons, if we were really visualizing that little teaspoon we use.
Interestingly, the American Heart Association has a little bit stricter guidelines. They say instead of the 50 grams, for men it would be 36 grams a day, and for women 25 grams a day, so quite a bit lower. But we know Americans are eating a ton more than that.
Tara Schmidt: Yes. And the nice thing that we can think about when we have these little scary guidelines is that we’re not asking for a complete 180. We’re not asking for elimination. I would encourage people to consider what added sugar they have in their regular eating pattern.
Is there a replacement? Is there a decrease in portion? Is there a decrease in frequency? This does not mean you can never have ice cream again. I do not want sugar-free ice cream. I think it’s going to give me some tummy trouble, to be honest. We’re going to have regular ice cream, but how often? How much?
We have lots of different areas to look at where all of this added sugar is coming from and not feel overwhelmed. I hope.
Lisa Lammert: Agreed. I very, very rarely have had people intentionally track every single gram of added sugar. That’s very difficult to do, but just like you’re saying, I encourage people, yes, be aware that you have an allowance for the day. But that allowance can be eaten up by desserts. But also there’s so many extra things that can sneak in there that contribute to that allowance without us even knowing.
Tara Schmidt: That’s just being aware of labels. A naturally occurring sugar outside of dairy is not going to have a label. Apples don’t have nutrition labels. If you do have dairy or non dairy alternatives, the wonderful thing is you can look at total sugar versus added sugar — which I think was one of the best changes to our nutrition label in the last 10 years.
Lisa Lammert: Yeah, absolutely. I love that. I use that personally where, and I kind of visualize in my mind, okay, if four grams of added sugar is one teaspoon, and I’m looking at a container of yogurt and it’s got, say, 12 grams of added sugar. I think okay, in this little yogurt cup, they’ve put three teaspoons of sugar. Just that visualization is helpful versus thinking about grams is a little harder to visualize.
Tara Schmidt: We know that there are external indicators of too much sugar. Things like acne or dental health, weight gain – if it is related to excess calorie intake. Let’s talk a little bit about sugar and if it has an adverse role in internal health.
Lisa Lammert: Yeah, sugar can absolutely impact many organ systems. We know from a heart disease standpoint, increased sugar, the research shows higher blood pressure, increased lipid levels, like triglycerides. More inflammation. All of that can increase our risk for heart disease.
Our liver is going to store that excess sugar as fat that can damage those liver cells, leading to liver disease. And then of course diabetes, too, is the more obvious one, but those high blood sugars over time can impact our insulin levels, our insulin resistance, can put us in a pre-diabetic or diabetic state over time.
Tara Schmidt: Any long term effects on the brain?
Lisa Lammert: Our brain is fueled by carbohydrates. We eat carbohydrates, that’s broken down into glucose, and that’s our brain’s main fuel source. But when we have a high blood sugar, if we’re eating a lot of added sugar, our blood sugars are consistently running higher, there’s concern that that’s going to damage some of those small vessels in our brain that can impact blood flow. And that’s going to impact cognition over time, especially in those with diabetes.
A lot of people are either proud of the fact, or maybe embarrassed of the fact, that they have a sweet tooth. It’s a little bit controversial, but do you believe in a sugar addiction? 
Lisa Lammert: It is controversial and “addiction” is such a strong word. But, I do think sugar can definitely have some addictive tendencies. We can crave it more, and part of the reason we think this is, is we eat a delicious sweet treat that’s high in sugar and we do get a temporary release of a brain chemical called dopamine. And that dopamine is a feel good chemical.
Lisa Lammert: It makes us feel good. We like it! Dopamine is tied to our motivation, our reward center. Naturally, we’re going to want to keep coming back for more. And I do see when people are having sugar very often, I’ve even noticed that when I go on vacation I’m maybe having a little bit more treats and when I come back home I want more.
Tara Schmidt: I’ve had this conversation as well in an addiction program that I worked with within Mayo, where people who are no longer using, let’s say alcohol or drugs, tend to go towards sugar — they’re kind of like snacking on candy. Which made complete sense, because they were no longer getting dopamine from their drug of choice, or from alcohol. And so what’s the next closest or easily accessible thing? It was sugar.
Lisa Lammert: Yes. It totally makes sense that that’s what they turn to, to still get that little, little boost of a feel good response.
Tara Schmidt: Do you recommend that people track their sugar intake?
Lisa Lammert: I don’t often recommend it because it’s tedious. It’s hard to do. What I have recommended is if somebody’s looking to reduce their added sugar, I have said, “Why don’t you take one day and try to roughly track what you’re taking in?” Because I do think it’s nice to have a bit of a starting point.
It helps us know where it’s coming from, and now how can I look at reducing it?
Tara Schmidt: Yeah. Who needs to monitor it? What should they be aware of?
Lisa Lammert: First and foremost, people who have diabetes need to monitor their blood sugar levels closely. If they are eating an apple, if they are eating a cookie, whether it’s natural sugar or an added sugar, those foods are going to increase their blood sugar. And it’s important that their blood sugar levels are maintained at normal levels.
Typically that’s gonna be done with some kind of blood glucose meter, or there are more people using these continuous glucose monitors to really watch everything their blood sugar is doing throughout the day. While that can be helpful, I guess, to have that information, I don’t know that that level of detail is probably necessary if you don’t have diabetes or don’t have a medical reason why.
Tara Schmidt: Yeah. I had a patient who was doing that, without diabetes, say things like, “Oh, I ate oatmeal and my blood sugar spiked.” And I said, yeah, anyone in this room with or without diabetes would have a blood glucose rise with oatmeal. But there are a heck of a lot more positive things about plain oatmeal than negative things. The fact that they raise your blood sugar because they have carbohydrates, but it’s a really healthy carbohydrate. It can be even more confusing for people perhaps.
Lisa Lammert: Yeah, you’re right that we need to understand when we eat any carbohydrate we’re going to have some increase in our blood sugar. That’s absolutely what we expect. But the goal is that we’re having a gradual increase and a gradual decrease and that we’re not having these large spikes and then these crashes and kind of having a bit of a roller coaster experience.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about blood sugar spikes. What are they and how do they impact us?
Lisa Lammert: Yes. I think the classic example I have is, let’s say for breakfast, somebody eats just a donut. There’s a lot of added sugar. It’s delicious. There’s no fiber though. There’s very, very, very little protein, if any. What’s going to happen is, we are going to get a pretty dramatic and quick blood sugar spike, shortly, probably followed by some kind of crash.
And that makes us not feel good throughout the day. It’s very likely that we’re going to have some fatigue, some decrease in energy. And when we have that decrease in energy, what are we likely to do?
We might go seek out something else that’s high in sugar to just give us that energy. And I think on a deeper level, we know when we’re having these high blood sugars repeatedly, again, our body is like, “Okay, I have to treat this high blood sugar by pumping out insulin.”
Insulin helps our blood sugar get into the cells where it belongs. But a lot of production of that can create a little bit of something we call insulin resistance, where the cells are a little less receptive. They’re just not going to respond to that insulin as well. And insulin resistance builds up over time.
Tara Schmidt: They get fatigued. We’re having them run a marathon where they should only be doing occasional jogs or something.
Tara Schmidt: How could someone prevent a blood sugar spike, especially if they have diabetes? I like to tell my patients to have a bit of protein and fiber in a meal if they’re going to eat something sweet with it — like a cookie, right?
Lisa Lammert: Oh, absolutely. Yes. I think the meals are very likely going to have fiber. They’re going to have protein. That’s really going to change how our body responds to the added sugar in that cookie. And yeah, treats are a part of life. I don’t want people to feel like they can never have them.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about the highs and the lows. When your blood sugar is too high, as we call it hyperglycemia, what’s happening in the body?
Lisa Lammert: Our blood sugar increases. Our body’s pumping out insulin. Our pancreas is pumping out insulin to try to bring that blood sugar down, by helping the blood sugar enter the cells. But if it’s not able to do that, that high blood sugar over time is going to lead to potential damage to our blood vessels, potential damage to some of our organ systems, more inflammation.
People might start to feel fatigued. They might have increased urination. Those can be signs of pre-diabetes or diabetes that would need to be addressed.
Tara Schmidt: Let’s talk about the opposite – hypoglycemia, when your blood sugar is too low. How does that happen, and what should people do in that case, especially people with diabetes?
Lisa Lammert: It’s the exact opposite. The blood sugar is going too low. And we can see people get low energy, fatigue, weakness, shaky, dizzy. And in a diabetic, it can happen. They’re commonly taking some kind of medication or insulin to help them lower their blood sugars. And sometimes if they haven’t eaten enough, or perhaps they’ve taken insulin and that is working, that can kind of shoot their blood sugars down. And the goal is to get the blood sugars down, but it goes down too much. And they can get hypoglycemia where they’re feeling those symptoms.
The best thing to do then is to have a quick, easy carbohydrate that brings their blood sugar up, hopefully within the course of a few minutes. That might be a little bit of juice. It might be a little bit of candy, whatever is a quick source of that sugar to get the blood sugar up.
There are some people with hypoglycemia or who experience hypoglycemia that aren’t diabetic and that’s more likely to happen if somebody has a very concentrated source of added sugar without a lot of protein or fiber and their blood sugar levels go up and then they kind of crash and they crash too much and then they start to feel those hypoglycemic symptoms as well.
Tara Schmidt: And not necessarily bad, because that means your pancreas was working quite well.
Tara Schmidt: Just something to be mindful of. When someone has true hypoglycemia, I like to teach them about the rule of 15. Do you use that too?
Lisa Lammert: Yes, I have. Fifteen grams of a carbohydrate and give it about 15 minutes to work.
Tara Schmidt: And check before and after because interestingly enough, especially when someone has a diagnosis of diabetes, some of the symptoms of hypoglycemia are pretty similar to some of the symptoms of hyper. We never want to chug this four ounce soda cause they actually might be high.
Lisa Lammert: Yes. And we don’t want to just assume and then if they were high, then they’re going even higher.
Tara Schmidt: How does aging affect how we process sugar? Does it impact us differently?
Lisa Lammert: That’s such a good question. I think we know as we age, our cells are very likely becoming less responsive. We’re less sensitive to insulin. We’re going to be much more likely to have higher blood sugars or insulin resistance if we eat too much sugar as an older adult versus if we’re a kid.
In terms of how we process sugar our digestive system is still obviously working, but things are just slowing down a little bit. And we’re probably not reacting to things as well as we once did.
Tara Schmidt: Well, and is that also why, as you get older, the range for, quote, normal blood sugar is actually a little bit more lax?
 Tara Schmidt: The average American consumes way more sugar than the health guidelines suggest. No one’s expecting you to track every gram you consume – that’s almost impossible. But as we age, keeping an eye on our sugar intake becomes more important. If you want to monitor your intake, pay attention to the added sugar on a nutrition label.
Visualize a teaspoon for every 4 grams of sugar listed. and go from there. Too much sugar can increase blood pressure, lipid levels, and inflammation, which increases the risk of heart disease.
There’s also damage to liver cells that can lead to liver disease. And high blood sugar can also impact cognition and blood flow to the brain and of course, there’s an increased risk of diabetes. Now if you already have diabetes, you need to monitor your blood sugar. When it gets too low, you can become hypoglycemic. It’s best to use the rule of 15. Have something with at least 15 grams of carbohydrate, and wait 15 minutes for symptoms to improve before checking again.
But if you don’t have diabetes, the goal is to have a gradual increase and decrease of blood sugar throughout your day. Otherwise, you may be prone to insulin resistance or hyperglycemia when your blood sugar is too high. When that happens, prioritize eating protein and fiber. Now let’s get into what we can do to consume less sugar, and whether it’s possible, or necessary, to cut it out completely.
Alright, Lisa, if you’ll humor me, I’m going to read this label and get your reaction. It’s yogurt, which I think has a quite nice reputation right now. We’ve got probiotics and good for the microbiome, etcetera. However, in 5.3 ounces, which is a pretty normal serving of yogurt, it has 19 grams of total sugar, but that is not important. We need to look at the added sugar because milk, lactose and the added sugar is 15.
Lisa Lammert: You know, it’s a great example of why it is important to look at that nutrition label, specifically at the added sugar. If there’s 15 grams of added sugar, when we think about 4 grams is 1 teaspoon, there’s almost 4 teaspoons of added sugar in that little yogurt. And that’s a pretty significant portion of our allotment for the day.
That’s not counting, maybe we are going to have a cookie later. Maybe we are going to have a salad dressing that has some sugar snuck into it. It’s a great example of why we want to pay attention to those labels.
Tara Schmidt: And this is not to say that you can’t enjoy a very, very delicious flavored yogurt. If that is your dessert and it helps you then go for it. Even better: You’re getting calcium, you’re getting vitamin D. This one had 10 grams of protein in it. I have lots of positive things to say as well.
We just want to bring awareness to you so you don’t have to also eat plain yogurt, if that makes you nauseated, but that even gives you a little bit of leeway to do something like add a drizzle of honey or sugar in, and I would usually not ever encourage that, but I want to in this case because it’s probably going to be less than 15 grams, even if you do add it yourself.
Lisa Lammert: I agree. I’ve even encouraged patients to have a fruit spread, like a jam and put a little bit of it in there. Then you’re getting to control how much sugar is added, rather than you’re just kind of at the mercy of, okay, there’s this much sugar in this product.
Tara Schmidt: And can we quickly go through, if there’s any difference between honey, white sugar, brown sugar, agave nectar, natural, quote, maple syrup?
Lisa Lammert: The short answer is no, there’s not really a difference. Our body really takes white sugar, brown sugar, pure maple syrup, agave, breaks all of those sugars down very similarly. They’re going to have very similar impacts on our blood sugar. They’re going to contribute calories. There’s a lot of names for sugar out there.
Tara Schmidt: Lots and lots of them that we might not recognize. But yeah, sometimes it can be confusing when people talk about, “Well, I don’t do added sugar. I do honey.” And I’m like, it’s essentially the same.
Let’s talk about strategies that we could use to kind of lower those spikes that are going to happen.
Lisa Lammert: Having consistency in how and when we eat can be important. And then a really big key is balance at our meals. We want to have some protein. We want to have some fiber. Those components really help that blood sugar response stay more even, stay a little bit out of that territory of the steep increases and the crashes. Whether it’s fruits or vegetables, whole grains, nuts, seeds and beans, making sure those are on our plate.
Tara Schmidt: Absolutely. How can we reduce added sugar in our baking?
Lisa Lammert: Over the years I’ve found that typically I can reduce the sugar by sometimes as much as 25 percent and not really notice a huge difference. There are certain treats like if something is really made up of a lot of cocoa, I’m thinking, a brownie, the sugar there is important to balance out that bitterness of the cocoa.
But even there, I’ve been able to get away with reducing it a little bit. I’ve also read, and I’ve tried this too, that sometimes you can reduce the sugar in a recipe. But then maybe when the treat is finished baking, you could dust it with a little bit of powdered sugar or just a light glaze on there. Then it’s our perceived taste that when we take a bite it’s sugar, but we don’t notice as much that there’s less sugar overall in the recipe.
Tara Schmidt: That’s a super good idea. Yeah. I’m pretty confident with 25 percent having a fairly little impact. I have dabbled in 50%. For those of us who struggle with craving sugar, kind of having that sweet tooth. Are there ways to quiet it?
Lisa Lammert: Yeah, it’s tough, but I don’t think it’s impossible. I really encourage people to experiment with gradually reducing sugar in little ways. If somebody normally puts sugar in their coffee, reduce it by half. If you normally put sugar in your oatmeal, reduce it by half. And I think just having a little bit less overall probably reduces cravings.
There’s other habits too. Our stress management, our sleep, and good hydration. All of those things also help us fight some of those cravings. And then I really encourage people to just get curious about it. When they’re wanting sugar, pausing and thinking, why? Am I tired? Am I sad? Am I hungry? Really just taking a pause. And maybe you still eat the sugar, but you’re just starting to notice why and start to think about other healthy habits we could maybe substitute in.
Tara Schmidt: Yes, I was just thinking of the example from Charles Duhigg in his book, Power of Habits, where he was searching for a cookie right at four O’clock. And he did various experiments and it really wasn’t the cookie. It was that he was going somewhere else in the office, socializing. He’s like, “Oh, that’s what I was looking for.” Maybe at three O’clock you’re looking for fresh air or a break from screen time, or I don’t know, close your eyes for 10 minutes.
Tara Schmidt: That’s not always sugar. And something I think is to experiment with things that are sweet, but might not be considered sweet for you. I have an orange-flavored tea, and it tastes sweet to me, right? It’s orange, so that makes sense, but there’s no added sugar, but that really does it for me just as much as a frou frou coffee drink would, right?
Or in the Mayo Clinic diet for the first two weeks, we try to cut added sugar, but we don’t limit natural sugars. The example is that you have a peanut butter and not jelly sandwich – because it would be really, really hard to find jelly without any form of added sugar – you have a peanut butter and blueberry or peanut butter and sliced strawberry sandwich.
Lisa Lammert: I love that. Those are great ideas.
Tara Schmidt: Do you think it’s possible for people to completely cut out sugar from their diet?
Lisa Lammert: Anything’s possible, but I think it would be very difficult, and I think it’s probably not completely necessary to cut it out completely. For many of us, there’s a lot of nostalgia in grandma’s chocolate chip cookies, or there’s just certain treats and desserts that are part of life. But I do think it’s important to be mindful of how often I am having these. And when I’m having it, what’s my portion size like?
Am I having one cookie? Or am I having three? And then it’s really important to be mindful of where all of the extra added sugar is sneaking in.
Tara Schmidt: I think you or I could look at that person’s diet and probably find a good number of things that they could add to their diet, which would be way more fun, right? Can we add some beans? Or more vegetables? Or different kinds of fiber?
Much better to challenge yourself with “what can I do to my diet to increase the nutrition of it,” versus like, “Hey, I’m going to cut out all added sugar.”  Probably not be sad. I guess I would be sad.
Lisa Lammert: Yes, agreed. And that just goes back to, there’s so much about our diet that it’s not really one singular food. It’s a balance.
Tara Schmidt: Exactly. Lisa, thank you so much for joining me today and sharing all of your wisdom.
Lisa Lammert:   So good to see you, Tara.
Tara Schmidt: Now it’s time to let you in on a little secret. There’s no nutritional difference between white sugar, brown sugar, agave, maple syrup, and even molasses. Your body breaks it down all very similarly. If you want to lower the sugar when baking, you can start off by reducing it by about 25%, or try dusting your dessert with powdered sugar or a light glaze so you can trick your taste buds.
And when it comes to your overall diet, consider eating more nutrients and prioritizing natural sugars over added ones. It’s not necessary to cut out sugar completely, but it is best for your health to examine and adjust your relationship to it. Balance is key.
That’s all for this episode, But if you’ve got a question or topic suggestion, you can leave us a voicemail at 507-538-6272. We might even feature your voice on the show. For more “On Nutrition” episodes and resources, check us out online at mayoclinic.org/OnNutrition. If you found this show helpful, please subscribe and make sure to rate and review us on your podcast app. It really helps others find the show. Thanks for listening. Until next time, eat well and be well.
The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight-Loss Medications Edition
This new edition of The Mayo Clinic Diet combines the practical, no-nonsense approach of the time-tested Mayo Clinic eating plan with brand-new information on the safe and effective use of prescription weight-loss medications. Designed to support people who are using prescription medications to lose weight and who want to make lasting lifestyle…
Discover more Nutrition & Fitness content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef

      Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN, LD is a registered dietitian and instructor of nutrition at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, MN. She is the lead dietitian for the Mayo Clinic Diet, host of the podcast On Nutrition, Medical Editor of the Nutrition & Fitness channel, and co-authored  The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight Loss Medications Edition. Tara is passionate about reducing weight bias and educating people about realistic, evidence-based weight management. Tara enjoys staying busy with her husband, two children, and golden retriever (who just so happens to like vegetables).
    

      Lisa Lammert is a registered dietician nutritionist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Jennifer A. Welper, Wellness Executive Chef
by Donald D. Hensrud, M.D., M.S., Andres J. Acosta, M.D., Ph.D., Tara Schmidt, M. Ed., RDN
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.