Gestational diabetes is diabetes that's first diagnosed during pregnancy. Pregnancy sometimes is called gestation. Like other types of diabetes, gestational diabetes affects how the body's cells use sugar, also called glucose. Gestational diabetes causes high blood sugar that can affect a pregnancy and a baby's health.
The good news is that you may be able to control gestational diabetes. Eat healthy foods, exercise and, if needed, take medicine. Controlling blood sugar can help keep you and your baby healthy, and it may help prevent some problems during delivery.
For most people who have gestational diabetes, blood sugar goes back to its usual level soon after a baby is born. But if you've had gestational diabetes, you have a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. That means you'll need to be tested for changes in blood sugar more often.
Most of the time, gestational diabetes doesn't cause symptoms that are easy to notice. Being thirsty and urinating more often are possible symptoms.
If possible, seek healthcare when you start to think about trying to get pregnant. Then your healthcare professional can check your risk of gestational diabetes and your overall wellness. Once you're pregnant, your healthcare professional will check you for gestational diabetes as part of your prenatal care.
If you have gestational diabetes, you'll need checkups more often. These extra checkups are most likely to be during the last three months of pregnancy. Your healthcare professional will check your blood sugar level and your baby's health.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Experts don't yet know why some people get gestational diabetes and others don't. Extra weight before pregnancy often plays a role.
Hormones, mainly insulin, keep blood sugar at the right level in the body. But during pregnancy, hormone levels change. Those changes may make it harder for the body to use blood sugar as it should. This makes blood sugar rise.
Risk factors for gestational diabetes include:
If high blood sugar isn't controlled, it can cause health problems for you and your baby. This includes an increased risk of needing surgery to deliver the baby. That surgery is called a C-section.
If you have gestational diabetes, your baby may be at higher risk of:
Gestational diabetes may raise your risk of:
There is no sure way to prevent gestational diabetes. But having healthy habits before pregnancy can help. If you've had gestational diabetes, these healthy choices also might lower your risk of getting diabetes again. That includes developing gestational diabetes during another pregnancy and developing type 2 diabetes in the future.
Keep active. Exercising before and during pregnancy can help protect you from getting gestational diabetes. Aim for 30 minutes of moderate activity on most days of the week. Take a brisk daily walk. Ride a bike. Swim laps.
Short bursts of activity add up. These might include parking further away from the store when you run errands or taking short walks throughout the day.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.