Infectious diseases are illnesses that happen when tiny living beings get inside the body and multiply. Bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites are examples of organisms that can cause illness. Many organisms live in and on our bodies. They're too small to see with the eyes. And they're often harmless or even helpful. But under certain conditions, some organisms can cause disease.
Some infectious diseases can pass from person to person. Some spread through insects or other animals. You may get others by eating contaminated food or water. Or you could be exposed to germs around you, such as those on surfaces.
Symptoms of infectious diseases vary depending on the cause of the infection. But they often include fever and tiredness. Rest and home remedies may clear up mild infections. But other infections can be life-threatening, and treatment could involve hospital care.
Many infectious diseases, such as measles and chickenpox, can be prevented by vaccines. And other illnesses, such as COVID-19, might make you less sick if you get vaccinated. Frequent and thorough hand-washing also helps protect you from most infectious diseases.
Each infectious disease has its own specific symptoms. But some illnesses share general symptoms, such as:
Call your healthcare professional if you:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
An easy way to catch most infectious diseases is by coming in contact with an infected person or animal. These diseases can be spread through direct contact such as:
Person to person. This can happen when an infected person touches, kisses, or coughs or sneezes on someone who isn't infected.
These germs also can spread through body fluids during sexual contact. The person who passes the germ may have no symptoms.
Disease-causing germs also can be passed by indirect contact. Many germs can linger on surfaces such as tabletops, doorknobs or faucet handles.
For example, say you touch a doorknob that's been handled by someone ill with the flu or a cold. You could pick up the germs that person left behind. If you then touch your eyes, mouth or nose before washing your hands, you may become infected.
Bugs such as mosquitoes, fleas, lice or ticks can harbor germs and spread them to people with their bites. Mosquitoes can carry the malaria parasite or West Nile virus. Deer ticks may carry the bacterium that causes Lyme disease.
Disease-causing germs also can infect you through contaminated food and water. For example, the bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) is present in or on foods such as undercooked hamburger or unpasteurized fruit juice.
Anyone can catch infectious diseases. But you may be more likely to get sick if your immune system isn't working properly. This may happen if:
Other risk factors include malnutrition and hospital procedures that insert tubes in a vein to give medicine or other treatments.
Some infectious diseases cause minor health problems, such as the common cold. Others can become life-threatening, such as pneumonia and meningitis. A few types of infections have been linked to a long-term higher risk of cancer:
The germs that cause some infectious diseases also may become inactive, only to cause problems again in the future. For example, someone who's had chickenpox may develop shingles much later in life.
Follow these tips to lower the risk of infection:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.