Raynaud's (ray-NOSE) disease causes some areas of the body — such as fingers and toes — to feel numb and cold in response to cold temperatures or stress. In Raynaud's disease, smaller blood vessels that supply blood to the skin narrow. This limits blood flow to affected areas, which is called vasospasm.
Women are more likely than men to have Raynaud's disease. It seems to be more common in people who live in colder climates.
Treatment of Raynaud's disease depends on how bad it is and whether you have other health conditions. For most people, Raynaud's disease isn't disabling, but it can affect your quality of life.
Raynaud's disease causes smaller blood vessels that supply blood flow to the skin to narrow in response to cold or stress. The affected body parts, usually fingers and toes, might turn white then blue. Depending on your skin color, these color changes may be harder or easier to see. The affected areas may feel cold and numb until blood flow improves, usually after warming up.
Raynaud's disease causes smaller blood vessels that supply blood flow to the skin to narrow in response to cold or stress. The affected body parts, usually fingers and toes, might turn white then blue. Depending on your skin color, these color changes may be harder or easier to see. The affected areas may feel cold and numb until blood flow improves, usually after warming up.
During an attack of Raynaud's, affected areas of the skin usually first turn pale. Next, they often change color and feel cold and numb. When the skin warms and blood flow improves, the affected areas may change color again, throb, tingle or swell.
Raynaud's most commonly affects fingers and toes. But it also can affect other areas of the body, such as nose, lips, ears and even nipples. After warming up, the return of blood flow to the area can take 15 minutes.
See your healthcare professional right away if you have a history of severe Raynaud's and get a sore or infection in one of your affected fingers or toes.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Experts don't fully understand the cause of Raynaud's attacks. But blood vessels in the hands and feet appear to react too strongly to cold temperatures or stress.
With Raynaud's, blood vessels to the fingers and toes narrow when exposed to cold or stress. The narrowed vessels limit blood flow. Over time, these small blood vessels can thicken slightly and limit blood flow even more.
Cold temperatures are the most likely cause of an attack. Examples are putting hands in cold water, taking something from a freezer or being in cold air. For some people, emotional stress can trigger an episode.
There are two main types of the condition.

Secondary Raynaud's. Also called Raynaud's phenomenon, this form develops because of another health condition. Although secondary Raynaud's is less common than the primary form, it tends to be more serious.
Symptoms of secondary Raynaud's usually appear around age 40. That's later than symptoms appear for primary Raynaud's.
Risk factors for primary Raynaud's include:
Risk factors for secondary Raynaud's include:
If secondary Raynaud's is severe, reduced blood flow to fingers or toes could cause tissue damage. But that's rare.
A completely blocked blood vessel can lead to skin sores or dead tissue. This can be difficult to treat. Rarely, very bad untreated instances might require removing the affected part of the body.
Bundle up outdoors. When it's cold, wear a hat, scarf, socks and boots, and two sets of mittens or gloves. Thermal underwear might help. A coat with cuffs that close around mittens or gloves helps protect the hands from cold air.
Wear earmuffs and a face mask if the tip of your nose and your earlobes get too cold.
Take care indoors. Wear socks. To take food out of the refrigerator or freezer, wear gloves, mittens or oven mitts. Some people find it helpful to wear mittens and socks to bed during winter.
Because air conditioning can cause attacks, set your air conditioner to a warmer temperature. Use drinking glasses that keep hands from feeling cold.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.