Rheumatoid arthritis can be hard to diagnose in its early stages. That's because the early symptoms can be like those of other common conditions.
During the physical exam, your healthcare professional checks your joints for swelling, redness and warmth. Your healthcare professional also may check your reflexes and muscle strength.
People with rheumatoid arthritis often have an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), also called sed rate, or C-reactive protein (CRP) level. This may show a higher level of inflammation in the body. Other blood tests look for rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies.
You may have X-rays to track rheumatoid arthritis in your joints over time. MRI scans and ultrasound tests may help with diagnosis. They can show how bad the condition is.
There is no cure for rheumatoid arthritis. Joint damage can happen quickly without treatment. But clinical studies show that easing of symptoms, called remission, is more likely with early treatment with medicines called disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis also involves regular follow-up with your healthcare team. This is to watch for joint damage, to see whether treatment is working and to look for possible side effects of treatment.
Your healthcare professional will suggest medicines based on how bad your symptoms are and how long you've had rheumatoid arthritis. You and your healthcare professional will decide on treatment. Medicines might include:
NSAIDs. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can relieve pain and ease swelling and irritation. NSAIDs you can get without a prescription include ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve).
There also are stronger prescription NSAIDs. Side effects for all NSAIDs may include stomach upset, heart problems and kidney damage.
Steroids. Corticosteroid medicines, such as prednisone (Rayos), ease inflammation and pain and slow joint damage. There can be serious side effects. The risk of side effects rises when taken at high doses over a long time. Side effects may include thinning of bones, fractures, easy bruising from skin thinning, weight gain, diabetes, cataracts and glaucoma, among others.
Healthcare professionals often prescribe a corticosteroid for quick symptom relief. The goal is to taper off the medicine when the condition is under control.
Biologic agents. Also known as biologic response modifiers, this newer class of DMARDs includes abatacept (Orencia), adalimumab (Humira), anakinra (Kineret), certolizumab (Cimzia), etanercept (Enbrel), golimumab (Simponi), infliximab (Remicade), rituximab (Rituxan), sarilumab (Kevzara) and tocilizumab (Actemra).
Biologic DMARDs most often work best when used with a conventional DMARD, such as methotrexate. Biologic agents also raise the risk of rare infections such as tuberculosis, also called TB, or fungal infections. If you take biologic agents, you need to be watched closely.
Targeted synthetic DMARDs. Healthcare professionals may prescribe these human-made medicines if conventional DMARDs and biologics haven't worked. They include baricitinib (Olumiant), tofacitinib (Xeljanz) and upadacitinib (Rinvoq).
Higher doses of tofacitinib may raise the risk of blood clots in the lungs, serious heart-related events and cancer.
A physical or occupational therapist can teach you exercises to help keep your joints moving. The therapist also may suggest ways to do daily tasks that are easier on your joints. For instance, you may pick up an object using your forearms instead of your hands.
Assistive devices can make it easier to keep from stressing painful joints. For instance, a kitchen knife with a hand grip helps protect finger and wrist joints. Certain tools, such as buttonhooks, can make it easier to get dressed. Look for ideas in medical supply brochures and stores.
Better medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis have lowered the need for surgery. But if medicines fail to prevent or slow joint damage, you and your healthcare professional may think about surgery for damaged joints.
Rheumatoid arthritis surgery may involve replacing or repairing a damaged joint. The type of surgery may depend on the joint involved. Surgery may help you use a joint again. It also can ease pain.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Self-care measures, when used with your rheumatoid arthritis medicines, can help you manage your symptoms:
Some common complementary and alternative treatments that have shown promise for rheumatoid arthritis include:
Pain and not being able to move well because of rheumatoid arthritis can affect a person's work and family life. Depression and worry are common. You also might feel helpless and feel bad about yourself.
How much rheumatoid arthritis affects your daily life depends in part on how well you cope with the condition. Talk with your healthcare team about ways to cope. With time, you'll learn what works for you. In the meantime, try to:
Connect with others. Let people close to you know how you're feeling. They may be worried about you but might not feel it's OK to ask about your pain. Find someone you can talk to when your condition feels like it's too much for you to handle.
It also might help to connect with others who have rheumatoid arthritis. You can do this through a local support group or online.
You might first see your main healthcare professional. Your healthcare professional may send you to a specialist in the treatment of arthritis and other inflammatory conditions, called a rheumatologist.
Your healthcare team may ask some of these questions:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.