To diagnose premature ventricular contractions (PVCs), a health care provider will typically listen to your heart with a stethoscope. You may be asked questions about your lifestyle habits and medical history.
Tests are done to confirm a diagnosis of premature ventricular contractions.
An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) can detect the extra beats and identify the pattern and source.
An ECG is a quick and painless test to record the heart's electrical activity. Sticky patches (electrodes) are placed on the chest and sometimes the arms and legs. Wires connect the electrodes to a computer, which displays the test results. An ECG can show if the heart is beating too fast, too slow or not at all.
If you don't have PVCs very often, a standard ECG may not detect them. Your health care provider may ask you to use a portable ECG device at home to obtain more information about your heartbeats. Portable ECG devices include:
Your health care provider may also recommend an exercise stress test. This test often involves walking on a treadmill or riding a stationary bike while an ECG is done. An exercise stress test can help determine whether exercise triggers your PVCs.
Most people with premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) who don't have heart disease won't need treatment. If you have heart disease, PVCs can lead to more-serious heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias). Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
A health care provider may recommend the following treatment for frequent PVCs:
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
The following self-care strategies can help control premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and improve heart health:
You're likely to start by seeing your family care provider. You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases (cardiologist).
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Take a friend or relative with you, if possible, to help you remember the information you receive.
For premature ventricular contractions, questions to ask your health care provider include:
Your health care provider is likely to ask you questions, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.