A complete blood count (CBC) is a blood test. It's used to look at overall health and find a wide range of conditions, including anemia, infection and leukemia.
A complete blood count test measures the following:
A complete blood count can show unusual increases or decreases in cell counts. Those changes might point to a medical condition that calls for more testing.
A complete blood count is a common blood test done for many reasons:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
If your blood sample is being tested only for a complete blood count, you can eat and drink as usual before the test. If your blood sample also will be used for other tests, you might need to fast for a certain amount of time before the test. Ask your health care provider what you need to do.
For a complete blood count, a member of the health care team takes a sample of blood by putting a needle into a vein in your arm, usually at the bend in your elbow. The blood sample is sent to a lab. After the test, you can return to your usual activities right away.
The following are expected complete blood count results for adults. The blood is measured in cells per liter (cells/L) or grams per deciliter (grams/dL).
Male: 4.35 trillion to 5.65 trillion cells/L
Female: 3.92 trillion to 5.13 trillion cells/L
Male: 13.2 to 16.6 grams/dL
            (132 to 166 grams/L)
Female: 11.6 to 15 grams/dL
  (116 to 150 grams/L) 
A complete blood count, also called a CBC, usually doesn't give all the answers about a diagnosis. Results outside the expected range may or may not need follow-up. A health care provider might need to look at the results of other tests as well as the results of a CBC.
For example, results slightly outside the typical range on a CBC might not be of concern for someone who's healthy and has no symptoms of illness. Follow-up might not be needed. But for someone having cancer treatment, the results of a CBC outside the expected range might signal a need to change the treatment.
In some cases, for results that are way above or below the expected ranges, a health care provider might ask you to see a doctor who treats blood disorders, called a hematologist.
Results in the following areas above or below the typical ranges on a complete blood count might point to a problem.
Red blood cell count, hemoglobin and hematocrit. The results of these three are related because they each measure a feature of red blood cells.
Lower than usual measures in these three areas are a sign of anemia. Anemia has many causes. They include low levels of certain vitamins or iron, blood loss, or another medical condition. People with anemia might feel weak or tired. These symptoms may be due to the anemia itself or the cause of anemia.
A red blood cell count that's higher than usual is known as erythrocytosis. A high red blood cell count or high hemoglobin or hematocrit levels could point to a medical condition such as blood cancer or heart disease.
White blood cell count. A low white blood cell count is known as leukopenia. A medical condition such as an autoimmune disorder that destroys white blood cells, bone marrow problems or cancer might be the cause. Certain medicines also can cause a drop in white blood cell counts.
A white blood cell count that's higher than usual most commonly is due to an infection or inflammation. Or it could point to an immune system disorder or a bone marrow disease. A high white blood cell count also can be a reaction to medicines or hard exercise.
Your health care provider can tell you what your complete blood count results mean.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.