Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Tell your healthcare professional about any vaginal bleeding during pregnancy. Be ready to say how much blood you passed, what it looked like and whether it had clots or tissue in it.
During the first trimester, weeks one through 12:
During the second trimester, weeks 13 through 27:
During the third trimester, weeks 28 through 40:
In the final weeks of pregnancy, vaginal discharge that is pink or bloody might be a sign of labor starting. That's called the bloody show. If you see pink or bloody discharge near the end of pregnancy, contact your healthcare professional to make sure what you're having is bloody show. Sometimes, it might be a sign of a pregnancy complication.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.