Mayo Clinic is one of the leading medical facilities in the country that diagnoses and treats lung diseases. Many Mayo Clinic doctors specialize in interstitial lung disease.
Experts in the Interstitial Lung Disease Clinic work closely with a multispecialty team that includes chest surgeons, radiologists and pathologists. Together they create a treatment plan for you that's based on the full range of options, a full evaluation, the correct diagnosis, and your concerns and treatment goals.
Experts at Mayo Clinic have access to a wealth of resources to find and treat your condition — all in one convenient location. Testing and consultations are scheduled in an efficient and coordinated way to quickly find answers and begin treatment.
Mayo Clinic's pulmonary function laboratories offer many tests for common and rare conditions that affect the lungs and breathing. The medical professionals who staff these labs put your needs first. You'll get prompt, compassionate care that focuses on you.
Interventional pulmonology at Mayo Clinic focuses on advanced diagnostic and therapeutic procedures for lung and chest diseases. Methods include all types of bronchoscopy, thoracentesis, pleuroscopy and a full evaluation of airway conditions. Interventional pulmonologists offer diagnostic and treatment services for all major lung conditions. They work closely with a multispecialty team to create a treatment plan for you.
Experts at Mayo Clinic use the latest technology to give the best care in the outpatient and hospital settings.
Mayo Clinic's Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program helps people who have chronic pulmonary disease. Experienced specialists in this program work with you to make your health better and lower your risk of future pulmonary disease and medical complications.
The staff in the Pulmonary Hypertension Clinic at Mayo Clinic provide skilled diagnosis and individual treatment plans to people with pulmonary hypertension. Mayo Clinic healthcare professionals have many years of experience in diagnosing and treating pulmonary hypertension.
Mayo Clinic offers the Lung Transplant Program for people who need this option. Mayo's lung transplant doctors and surgeons use proven innovations to successfully treat people with serious lung diseases. And Mayo Clinic is among the few medical institutions that offer the full spectrum of options for lung transplants, including heart-lung transplants.
Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.
Joshua Abelson, a 63-year-old aviation sales and supply chain professional, has faced numerous health challenges with remarkable resilience. Originally from Fort Worth, Texas, Joshua now resides in Jacksonville, Florida, where he continues to inspire others with his story. Joshua's transplant journey began in 2009 when he first noticed symptoms that led to a diagnosis of interstitial lung disease (ILD), specifically pulmonary fibrosis, after numerous X-rays and scans. This diagnosis marked the start of a long…
Every year, Mayo Clinic specialists treat more than 10,000 people with interstitial lung disease. Mayo Clinic offers:
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, is ranked among the Best Hospitals for pulmonology, neurology & neurosurgery, heart & heart surgery, and ear, nose & throat by U.S. News & World Report. Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, is ranked high performing for psychiatry by U.S. News & World Report. Mayo Clinic Children's in Rochester is ranked the No. 1 hospital in Minnesota, and the five-state region of Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wisconsin, according to U.S. News & World Report's 2024-2025 "Best Children's Hospitals" rankings.
Mayo Clinic has major campuses in Phoenix and Scottsdale, Arizona; Jacksonville, Florida; and Rochester, Minnesota. The Mayo Clinic Health System has dozens of locations in several states.
For more information on visiting Mayo Clinic, choose your location below:
Mayo Clinic works with hundreds of insurance companies and is an in-network provider for millions of people.
In most cases, Mayo Clinic doesn't require a physician referral. Some insurers require referrals or may have additional requirements for certain medical care. All appointments are prioritized on the basis of medical need.
Learn more about appointments at Mayo Clinic.
Please contact your insurance company to verify medical coverage and to obtain any needed authorization prior to your visit. Often, your insurer's customer service number is printed on the back of your insurance card.
More information about billing and insurance:
Mayo Clinic in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.