There's no test to definitively diagnose IBS. A healthcare professional is likely to start with a complete medical history, physical exam and tests to rule out other conditions, such as celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
After other conditions have been ruled out, a care professional is likely to use one of these sets of diagnostic criteria for IBS:
A healthcare professional also will likely explore whether you have other symptoms that might suggest another, more serious condition. These include:
If you have these symptoms, or if an initial treatment for IBS doesn't work, you'll likely need more tests.
A healthcare professional may recommend several tests to help with diagnosis.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your irritable bowel syndrome-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment of IBS focuses on relieving symptoms so that you can live as symptom-free as possible.
Mild symptoms often can be controlled by managing stress and by making changes in diet and lifestyle. Try to:
A healthcare professional might suggest eliminating these foods:
A dietitian can help with these diet changes.
If problems are moderate or severe, a healthcare professional might suggest counseling — especially if depression or stress tends to make symptoms worse.
Based on symptoms, medicines may be recommended, including:
Medicines approved for certain people with IBS include:
Researchers are investigating new treatments for IBS, such as fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). Considered investigational at this time, FMT restores healthy intestinal bacteria by placing another person's processed stool into the colon of a person affected by IBS. Clinical trials to study fecal transplants are currently underway.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Simple changes in your diet and lifestyle often provide relief from IBS. Your body typically needs time to respond to these changes. Try to:
The role of alternative therapies in relieving IBS symptoms is unclear. Ask a healthcare professional before starting any of these treatments. Alternative therapies include:
You may be referred to a provider who specializes in the digestive system, called a gastroenterologist.
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask questions during your appointment anytime you don't understand something.
You'll likely be asked a few questions. Being ready to answer them may leave time to go over points you want to spend more time on. You may be asked:

Irritable bowel syndrome care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.