A complete neurological exam and medical history are needed to diagnose MS.
A complete neurological exam and medical history are needed to diagnose MS.
Neurologist Oliver Tobin, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., Ph.D., answers the most frequently asked questions about multiple sclerosis. 
So people who are overweight have a higher chance of developing MS and people who have MS who are overweight tend to have more active disease and a faster onset of progression. The main diet has been shown to be neuroprotective is the Mediterranean diet. This diet is high in fish, vegetables, and nuts, and low in red meat.
So this question comes up a lot because patients who have multiple sclerosis can sometimes get a transient worsening of their symptoms in heat or if they exercise strenuously. The important thing to note is that heat does not cause an MS attack or MS relapse. And so it's not dangerous. You're not doing any permanent damage if this occurs. Exercise is strongly recommended and is protective to the brain and spinal cord. 
Scientists do not yet know which stem cells are beneficial in MS, what route to give them or what dose to give them or what frequency. So at the moment, stem cell treatments are not recommended outside of the context of a clinical trial.
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder or NMOSD and MOG-associated disorder can give features similar to multiple sclerosis. These are more common in people of Asian or African-American ethnicity. And your doctor may recommend blood tests to exclude these disorders.
Well, the first drug approved by the FDA for treatment of multiple sclerosis was in 1993. Since then, over 20 drugs have become available for treatment of MS. And the potency of these drugs has increased over time to the point where we can almost completely suppress the inflammatory component of the disease. This would not be possible if patients like you did not enroll in research studies. There are many different types of research studies, not just drug trials, but also observational studies, as all of these enhance our understanding of the disease, hopefully to lead to even better cures for multiple sclerosis.
Well, the most important thing about having a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis is that you are at the center of your medical team. A comprehensive MS center is the best place for management of multiple sclerosis, and this typically includes physicians with expertise in multiple sclerosis, neurologists, but also urologists, physiatrists or physical medicine and rehabilitation providers, psychologists, and many other providers who have specialty interest in multiple sclerosis. Engaging this team around you and your particular needs will improve your outcomes over time.
There are no specific tests for MS. The diagnosis is given by a combination of medical history, physical exam, MRIs and spinal tap results. A diagnosis of multiple sclerosis also involves ruling out other conditions that might produce similar symptoms. This is known as a differential diagnosis.
Brain MRI scan showing white lesions associated with multiple sclerosis.
Brain MRI scan showing white lesions associated with multiple sclerosis.
During a lumbar puncture, also known as a spinal tap, you typically lie on your side with your knees drawn up to your chest. Then a needle is inserted into the spinal canal in your lower back to collect cerebrospinal fluid for testing.
During a lumbar puncture, also known as a spinal tap, you typically lie on your side with your knees drawn up to your chest. Then a needle is inserted into the spinal canal in your lower back to collect cerebrospinal fluid for testing.
In most people with relapsing-remitting MS, the diagnosis is straightforward. Diagnosis is based on a pattern of symptoms related to MS and confirmed by test results.
Diagnosing MS can be harder in people with unusual symptoms or progressive disease. Additional testing may be needed.
Brain MRI is often used to help diagnose multiple sclerosis.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your multiple sclerosis-related health concerns
					Start Here


There is no cure for multiple sclerosis. Treatment typically focuses on speeding recovery from attacks, reducing relapses, slowing the progression of the disease and managing MS symptoms. Some people have such mild symptoms that no treatment is necessary.
Multiple sclerosis research laboratory at Mayo Clinic
During an MS attack, you may be treated with:
There are several disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) for relapsing-remitting MS. Some of these DMTs can be of benefit for secondary-progressive MS. One is available for primary-progressive MS.
Much of the immune response linked to MS happens in the early stages of the disease. Aggressive treatment with these medicines as early as possible can lower the relapse rate and slow the formation of new lesions. These therapies may reduce the risk of lesions and worsening disability.
Many of the disease-modifying therapies used to treat MS carry serious health risks. Selecting the right therapy for you depends on many factors. Factors include how long you've had the disease and your symptoms. Your healthcare team also looks at whether previous MS treatments have worked and your other health issues. Cost and whether you plan on having children in the future also are factors when deciding on treatment.
Treatment options for relapsing-remitting MS include injectable, oral and infusions medicines.
Interferon beta medicines. These medicines work by interfering with diseases that attack the body. They may decrease inflammation and increase nerve growth. Interferon beta medicines are injected under the skin or into muscle. They can reduce the number of relapses and make them less severe.
Side effects of interferons may include flu-like symptoms and injection-site reactions. You'll need blood tests to monitor your liver enzymes because liver damage is a possible side effect of interferon use. People taking interferons may develop antibodies that can reduce how well the medicine works.
Natalizumab (Tysabri). This is a monoclonal antibody that has been shown to decrease relapse rates and slow down the risk of disability.
Natalizumab is designed to block the movement of potentially damaging immune cells from your bloodstream to your brain and spinal cord. It may be considered a first-line treatment for some people with relapsing-remitting MS or as a second-line treatment in others.
This medicine increases the risk of a potentially serious viral infection of the brain called progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). Risk increases in people who are positive for antibodies that cause the PML JC virus. People who don't have the antibodies have extremely low risk of PML.
Ocrelizumab (Ocrevus). This medicine is approved by the FDA to treat both the relapsing-remitting and primary-progressive forms of MS. This treatment reduces the relapse rate and the risk of disabling progression in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. It also slows the progression of the primary-progressive form of multiple sclerosis.
Clinical trials showed that it reduced the relapse rate in relapsing disease and slowed worsening of disability in both forms of the disease.
Ocrelizumab is given via an IV infusion by a medical professional. Side effects may include irritation at the injection site, low blood pressure, a fever and nausea, among others. Some people may not be able to take ocrelizumab, including those with a hepatitis B infection. Ocrelizumab also may increase the risk of infections and some types of cancer, particularly breast cancer.
Alemtuzumab (Campath, Lemtrada). This treatment is a monoclonal antibody that decreases annual relapse rates and demonstrates MRI benefits.
This medicine helps reduce relapses of MS by targeting a protein on the surface of immune cells and depleting white blood cells. This effect can limit nerve damage caused by the white blood cells. But it also increases the risk of infections and autoimmune conditions, including a high risk of thyroid autoimmune diseases and rare immune-mediated kidney disease.
Treatment with alemtuzumab involves five consecutive days of infusions followed by another three days of infusions a year later. Infusion reactions are common with alemtuzumab.
Alemtuzumab is only available from registered healthcare professionals. People treated with the medicine must be registered in a special medicine safety monitoring program. Alemtuzumab is usually recommended for those with aggressive MS or as second-line treatment if other MS medicines didn't work.
Physical therapy can build muscle strength and ease some of the symptoms of MS.
These treatments can help relieve some of the symptoms of MS.
Therapy. A physical or occupational therapist can teach you stretching and strengthening exercises. The therapist also can show you how to use devices to make it easier to perform daily tasks.
Physical therapy and a mobility aid, when necessary, also can help manage leg weakness and help improve walking.
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor is a therapy being studied in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis and secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis. It works by altering the function of B cells, which are immune cells in the central nervous system.
Another therapy being studied in people with MS is stem cell transplantation. This treatment destroys the immune system of someone with MS and then replaces it with transplanted healthy stem cells. Researchers are still investigating whether this therapy can decrease inflammation in people with MS and help to "reset" the immune system. Possible side effects are fever and infections.
A type of protein called CD40L found in T cells has been shown to play a role in MS. Recent studies have shown that blocking this protein can help manage MS.
A new medicine called a phosphodiesterase inhibitor also is being studied. This medicine works to reduce inflammation by changing damaging immune system responses seen in MS.
Researchers also are learning more about how existing disease-modifying therapies work to lessen relapses and reduce multiple sclerosis-related lesions in the brain. Further studies are needed to determine whether treatment can delay disability caused by the disease.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
To help relieve the symptoms of MS, try to:
Many people with MS use a variety of alternative or complementary treatments to help manage their symptoms, such as fatigue and muscle pain.
Exercise, meditation, yoga, massage, eating a healthier diet, acupuncture and relaxation techniques may help boost overall mental and physical well-being.
According to guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology, research strongly indicates that oral cannabis extract (OCE) may improve symptoms of muscle contractions and pain. There is a lack of evidence that cannabis in any other form is effective in managing other MS symptoms.
Daily intake of vitamin D3 of 2,000 to 5,000 international units daily is recommended in people with MS. The connection between vitamin D and MS is supported by the association with exposure to sunlight and the risk of MS.
With time, you'll find what helps you cope with the stress of a chronic illness like multiple sclerosis. Until then, you may find it helps to:
Ask your healthcare team about your MS, including your test results, treatment options and, if you like, your prognosis. As you learn more about MS, you may become more confident in making treatment decisions.
Keeping your close relationships strong can help you deal with multiple sclerosis. Friends and family can provide the practical support you may need, such as helping take care of your home if you're in the hospital. And they can serve as emotional support when you feel overwhelmed by having MS.
Find someone who is willing to listen to you talk about your hopes and worries. This may be a friend or family member. The concern and understanding of a counselor, medical social worker, clergy member or MS support group also may be helpful.
Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.
If your healthcare professional thinks you might have multiple sclerosis, you may be referred to a doctor who specializes in conditions of the brain and nervous system, called a neurologist.
Because appointments can be brief, it's a good idea to be prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready.
Your time with your healthcare team is limited, so preparing a list of questions can help you make the most of your time together. List your questions from most important to least important in case time runs out. For multiple sclerosis, some basic questions to ask include:
Be prepared to answer questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.