Amaal Starling, M.D., a neurologist at Mayo Clinic, answers the important questions you may have about migraine.
Hi, I'm Dr. Amaal Starling, a neurologist at Mayo Clinic. And I'm here to answer some of the important questions that you might have about migraine.
Migraine is a disease of abnormal function within the setting of normal brain structure. An MRI of the brain solely tells you about the structure of the brain but tells you very little about the function of the brain. And that is why migraine doesn't show up on an MRI. Because it's abnormal function in the setting of normal structure.
Migraine is highly disabling for some individuals. In fact, it is the second leading cause of disability worldwide. Disabling symptoms are not just the pain, but also the sensitivity to light and sound, as well as the nausea and vomiting.
There is a wide range of disease severity in migraine. There are some people who only need a rescue or an acute treatment for migraine because they have infrequent migraine attacks. But there are other people who are having frequent migraine attacks, maybe two or three times a week. If they used rescue treatments for every attack, it could potentially lead to other complications. Those individuals need a preventive treatment regimen to reduce the frequency and severity of attacks. Those preventive treatments might be daily medications. They might be once a month injections or other injectable medications delivered once every three months.
This is why preventive treatment is so crucial. With preventive treatment, we can reduce the frequency as well as the severity of attacks so that you're not having attacks more than two times per week. However, for some individuals, despite preventive treatment, they may still have migraine symptoms more frequently throughout the week. For them, there are non-medication options for treating pain, such as biofeedback, relaxation techniques, cognitive behavioral therapy, as well as a number of devices that are non-medication options for treating migraine pain.
Yes, that is an option for the preventive treatment of chronic migraine. These onabotulinum toxin A injections are administered by your doctor once every 12 weeks to reduce the frequency and severity of migraine attacks. However, there are many different preventive treatment options. And it is important for you to speak with your doctor about which option is best for you.
The best way to partner with your medical team is to, number one, get a medical team. Many people living with migraine have not even talked to a doctor about their symptoms. If you have headaches where you have to rest in a dark room, where you might get sick to your stomach. Please talk to your healthcare professional about your symptoms. You might have migraine and we can treat migraine. Migraine is a chronic disease. And to best manage this disease, patients need to understand the disease. This is why I prescribe advocacy to all of my patients. Learn about migraine, join patient advocacy organizations, share your journey with others, and become empowered through advocacy and efforts to shatter the stigma of migraine. And together, the patient and the medical team can manage the disease of migraine. Never hesitate to ask your medical team any questions or concerns that you have. Being informed makes all the difference. Thanks for your time and we wish you well.
Migraines can be diagnosed by a specialist trained in treating headaches, known as a neurologist. The diagnosis is based on your medical history, symptoms, and a physical and neurological exam.
If your condition is complex or suddenly becomes serious, tests to rule out other causes of your pain might include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your migraine-related health concerns
					Start Here


Migraine treatment is aimed at stopping symptoms and preventing future attacks.
Many medicines have been designed to treat migraines. They fall into two broad categories:
Your treatment choices depend on how often you have headaches and how painful they are. Your treatment also depends on whether you have nausea and vomiting, whether your headaches are disabling, and whether you have other medical conditions.
Medicines used to relieve migraine pain work best when taken as soon as symptoms begin. These medicines include:
Some migraine medicines are not safe to take during pregnancy. If you're pregnant or trying to get pregnant, don't use any of these medicines without first talking with your healthcare professional.
Medicines can help prevent frequent migraines. Your healthcare professional might recommend these medicines if you have long-lasting, very bad headaches that happen often and don't respond well to treatment.
Preventive medicine can reduce how often you get a migraine, how painful the attacks are and how long they last. Options include:
Ask your healthcare professional if these medicines are right for you. Some are not safe to take during pregnancy. If you're pregnant or trying to get pregnant, don't use any of these medicines without first talking with your healthcare professional.
Devices that stimulate nerves, known as neuromodulation devices, can reduce the number of migraines you have or make them less painful. The devices are noninvasive and work by stimulating a peripheral or cranial nerve to change the brain's response to pain. Therapies include transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation, external vagal nerve stimulation and distal transcutaneous electrical stimulation. Combined occipital and trigeminal neurostimulation is another option.
Another therapy called single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation treats the brain to relieve migraine pain. For this therapy, you place the device on the back of your head.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
When symptoms of migraine start, try heading to a quiet, darkened room. Close your eyes and rest or take a nap. Place a cool cloth or ice pack wrapped in a towel or cloth on your forehead and drink lots of water.
To help soothe migraine pain, you also might want to:
Exercise regularly. Regular aerobic exercise reduces tension and can help prevent a migraine. If your healthcare professional agrees, choose aerobic activities you enjoy, such as walking, swimming and cycling. Warm up slowly, however, because sudden, intense exercise can cause headaches.
Regular exercise also can help you lose weight or maintain a healthy body weight. Obesity is thought to be a factor in migraines.
Nontraditional therapies might help with chronic migraine pain.
Herbs, vitamins and minerals. There is some evidence that the herbs feverfew and butterbur might prevent migraines or reduce their severity, though study results are mixed. Butterbur isn't recommended because of safety concerns.
A high dose of riboflavin, also called vitamin B-2, may reduce the number of migraines you have and how painful they are. Coenzyme Q10 supplements might decrease the frequency of migraines, but larger studies are needed.
Magnesium supplements have been used to treat migraines, but with mixed results.
Ask your healthcare professional if these treatments are right for you. If you're pregnant, talk with your healthcare professional before trying any of these treatments.
You'll probably first see your primary healthcare professional, who might then refer you to a doctor trained in evaluating and treating headaches, called a neurologist.
Take a family member or friend along, if possible, to help you remember the information you receive.
For migraines, questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you a number of questions, including:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Headache & Migraine support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.