Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Chronic pain can limit quality of life and lead to serious health problems. Finding treatment is important — as is balancing pain relief with your safety.
Chronic pain is a serious health condition that can lead to complications beyond physical symptoms. People with chronic pain may experience depression, anxiety and trouble sleeping.
Chronic pain is pain that is long lasting. It can affect every aspect of life — from relationships to finances. Chronic pain makes it harder to keep up with work, tasks at home and social gatherings. Some research suggests that the worse the pain, the more serious the effects on day-to-day life.
For these reasons, finding effective treatment for chronic pain is important. But the process is complex and personal. What works for one person's chronic low back pain may not bring relief for another person's osteoarthritis.
There are a number of reasons for this. The cause of the chronic pain, a person's biology and history all play a role in pain management. And finding pain therapies that bring you relief can take time.
Working with your healthcare team can help you find treatments that allow you to live an enjoyable, fulfilling life. The approach you choose should include more than medication. But medications might play a role in pain management.
Learn about the risks and benefits of common pain medications. This can help you make safe choices as you look for a solution to chronic pain.
NSAIDs are most effective for mild to moderate pain that occurs with swelling, known as inflammation. These medications are commonly used for arthritis and pain resulting from muscle sprains, strains, back and neck injuries, or menstrual cramps.
Benefits and risks. When taken as directed, NSAIDs are generally safe. But if you take more than the recommended dosage, NSAIDs may cause nausea, stomach pain, stomach bleeding or ulcers. Sometimes this can happen even when you take the recommended dosage.
Large doses of NSAIDs also can lead to trouble with kidney function, fluid retention and high blood pressure. Risks increase with age. Having other health conditions such as diabetes, a history of stomach ulcers or reflux, and kidney disease also raises the risk. 
Acetaminophen is usually recommended first for mild to moderate pain. It might be taken for pain due to a skin injury, headache, or conditions that affect the muscles and bones. Acetaminophen is often prescribed to help manage osteoarthritis and back pain. It also may be combined with opioids to reduce the amount of opioid needed.
COX-2 inhibitors are another type of NSAID. These medications were developed with the aim of reducing the common side effects of traditional NSAIDs. COX-2 inhibitors are commonly used for arthritis and pain resulting from muscle sprains, strains, back and neck injuries, or menstrual cramps. They are as effective as NSAIDs and may be the right choice with less risk of stomach damage.
Benefits and risks. By acting only on COX-2 enzymes, they allow COX-1 enzymes to continue to function. COX-1 enzymes protect the lining of the stomach. NSAIDs, on the other hand, block COX-1 and can cause side effects such as thinning of the stomach lining. This can lead to ulcers and bleeding.
The risk of stomach bleeding tends to be lower if you take a COX-2 inhibitor, but bleeding can still occur. This is true especially at higher doses. And COX-2 inhibitors can lead to headaches, dizziness, high blood pressure, kidney problems, fluid retention and high blood pressure. These medications may increase the risk of a heart attack or stroke.
Some medications commonly prescribed to manage depression and prevent seizures have been found to help relieve chronic pain. This is true especially for chronic nerve pain. They may help relieve back pain, fibromyalgia and diabetes-related nerve pain, known as diabetic neuropathy. Because chronic pain often worsens depression, antidepressants may offer the extra benefit of treating mood symptoms.
Generic (brand) names. Tricyclic antidepressants used in the treatment of chronic pain include amitriptyline and nortriptyline (Pamelor).
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, known as SNRIs, that may be prescribed to relieve chronic pain include duloxetine (Cymbalta, Drizalma Sprinkle), venlafaxine (Effexor XR) and milnacipran (Savella). 
Anti-seizure medications used to treat chronic nerve pain include gabapentin (Gralise, Neurontin, Horizant) and pregabalin (Lyrica). These medications treat the burning pain of shingles, known as postherpetic neuralgia. And they treat pain related to nerve damage in the legs and feet due to diabetes, known as diabetic neuropathy.
Opioid medications are synthetic cousins of opium and the drugs derived from opium such as heroin and morphine. These medications are typically prescribed for pain that's new, known as acute pain. Acute pain can stem from an injury, such as surgery or a broken bone.
Opioids currently cause the most overdose deaths in the United States — and that rate is still rising. Because the risks are so great, opioids are used at the lowest dose possible, usually for just a few days.
Benefits and risks. Research shows that over time your body adapts to these medications and they bring less and less pain relief. This is known as tolerance. It means that you need more of the medication to achieve the same degree of pain relief. Long-term use of opioids may lead to dependence on the medications and, eventually, addiction.
The longer you use opioids, the greater the risk of becoming addicted. But even using opioids to manage pain for more than a few days increases your risk. Researchers have found that the odds of being on opioids a year after starting a short course increases after only five days on the medication. 
While there isn't a cure for chronic pain, many effective pain medications are available to help reduce pain. As you try different medications, work with your healthcare professional to find the simplest long-term solution possible. Keep your medication risks to a minimum to help you enjoy many good days for many years to come. 
Vivien Williams: 50 million. That's how many people in the U.S. suffer from chronic pain. Many turn to opioid painkillers for relief.
Mike Hooten, M.D. (Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic): The evidence is not all that clear about the efficacy of those drugs long-term for chronic pain.
Vivien Williams: Mayo Clinic pain management specialist Dr. Mike Hooten says what is clear about these painkillers is the risk associated with taking them.
Mike Hooten, M.D.: The problems of addiction, but a related problem of accidental overdose deaths.
Vivien Williams: Morphine, oxycodone and hydrocodone are commonly prescribed opioids. Dr. Hooten says they are very effective when used short-term for pain, for example, after a surgery. For long-term use …
Mike Hooten, M.D.: There are a small group of studies that may show some benefit in in certain highly select groups of patients.
Vivien Williams: But, for many cases of chronic pain, Dr. Hooten says non-opioid pain relievers combined with other therapies, such as stress management can help people manage pain and maintain a high quality of life. For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.
Vivien Williams: This can be a common scenario: raiding the medicine cabinet for leftover painkillers after a sprained ankle or toothache. There's nothing wrong with popping an occasional opioid, right?
Mike Hooten, M.D. (Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic): They are dangerous. They could have adverse effects that the individual doesn't even know about.
Vivien Williams: Including addiction or accidental overdose. So, when is it appropriate to take opioids?
Mike Hooten, M.D.: After an operation, opioids are highly effective.
Vivien Williams: Dr. Mike Hooten is a pain management specialist at Mayo Clinic.
Mike Hooten, M.D: After trauma, for example, severe trauma, opioids would be appropriate.
Vivien Williams: Dr. Hooten says opioids are also beneficial during procedures, such as colonoscopies. Problems happen when people take them without a prescription or for too long.
Mike Hooten, M.D.: If they are predisposed to develop addiction, either neurobiologically or from a behavioral perspective, then all of a sudden we are selecting the individuals who may go on to have long-term problems.
Vivien Williams: If you have pain, talk to your health care provider. For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.