TMJ disorders affect the temporomandibular joint, located on each side of your head in front of your ears. A soft cartilage disk acts as a cushion between the bones of the joint, so the joint can move smoothly.
TMJ disorders affect the temporomandibular joint, located on each side of your head in front of your ears. A soft cartilage disk acts as a cushion between the bones of the joint, so the joint can move smoothly.
The temporomandibular (tem-puh-roe-man-DIB-u-lur) joint, also called TMJ, acts like a sliding hinge. It connects the jawbone to the skull. There is one joint on each side of the jaw. TMJ disorders — a type of temporomandibular disorder or TMD — can cause pain in the jaw joint and in the muscles that control jaw movement.
The exact cause of TMJ disorder is often hard to determine. The pain may be due to a mix of factors, including habits such as teeth clenching, gum chewing and nail biting; stress; and painful conditions that occur along with TMJ disorder such as fibromyalgia, osteoarthritis or jaw injury. The habit of teeth clenching or grinding also is known as bruxism.
Most of the time, the pain and discomfort related to TMJ disorders lasts for only a limited time. Self-managed home care, physical therapy for the jaw and the use of a mouth guard can be effective in treating symptoms of TMJ disorder. Surgery is usually a last resort after conservative measures have failed. But surgical treatments may help some people with TMJ disorders.
TMJ disorders also can cause a clicking sound or grating sensation when you open your mouth or chew. But if there's no pain or limitation of movement related to your jaw clicking, it's likely that you won't need treatment.
Seek medical attention if you have constant pain or tenderness in your jaw that occurs suddenly or during jaw movements or if you can't open or close your jaw completely. Your dentist, TMJ specialist or other healthcare professional can discuss possible causes and treatments.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
The temporomandibular joint combines a hinge action with sliding motions. The parts of the bones that work together in the joint are covered with cartilage and separated by a small shock-absorbing disk. This disk usually keeps the movement smooth.
Many times, the cause of TMJ disorder has a variety of causes and is hard to identify.
Factors that may raise the risk of getting TMJ disorders include:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.