To diagnose peripheral artery disease (PAD), a healthcare professional examines you. You are usually asked questions about your symptoms and medical history.
If you have peripheral artery disease, the pulse in the affected area may be weak or missing.
Tests to diagnose peripheral artery disease (PAD) or check for conditions that cause it may include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Peripheral artery disease (PAD)-related health concerns
					Start Here


The goals of treatment for peripheral artery disease (PAD) are:
Treatment for peripheral artery disease may include:
Lifestyle changes can help improve symptoms, especially if you have early peripheral artery disease. Such changes include:
If you have symptoms or complications of peripheral artery disease (PAD), you may need medicines.
Medicine to treat peripheral artery disease may include:
A graft is used to redirect blood flow around a blocked or narrowed artery. A graft can be a blood vessel from another part of the body or a synthetic substitute.
A graft is used to redirect blood flow around a blocked or narrowed artery. A graft can be a blood vessel from another part of the body or a synthetic substitute.
Sometimes, a surgery or procedure is needed to treat peripheral artery disease (PAD) or its symptoms.
There are things you can do to help manage peripheral artery disease (PAD). Try these tips to manage PAD and stop symptoms from getting worse:
Get regular exercise. Regular exercise is an important part of peripheral artery disease (PAD) treatment. Exercise helps improve blood flow to the arms and legs. So it can improve symptoms of PAD.
Usually, healthcare professionals recommend supervised exercise therapy for people with PAD. It's a program of exercise and education. It can help increase the distance you can walk pain-free.
It's important to take good care of your feet. PAD can make it harder for cuts and sores on the lower legs and feet to heal. This is especially true if you have PAD and diabetes.
Here is how to properly care for your feet:
If you have leg pain or other symptoms of peripheral artery disease (PAD), make an appointment for a health checkup. You may need to see a doctor trained in blood vessel diseases, called a vascular specialist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For peripheral artery disease (PAD), some basic questions to ask your healthcare professional are:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions.
A healthcare professional who sees you for peripheral artery disease (PAD) might ask:
If you smoke, quit. Smoking increases the risk of peripheral artery disease (PAD) and related conditions such as stroke and heart attack. Smoking also can make existing PAD worse. If you need help quitting, ask your care team for methods that can help.
Eating less saturated fat and adding more fruits and vegetables to your diet are other things you can do to help prevent or manage PAD.

Peripheral artery disease (PAD) care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.