Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Working during pregnancy isn't always easy. Know how to handle symptoms and stay healthy while getting the job done.
Most people can continue working during pregnancy. Being pregnant, however, might present challenges in the workplace. To stay healthy and productive on the job, you need to understand how to relieve common pregnancy discomforts — and know when a work task might jeopardize the pregnancy.
It's called "morning" sickness, but pregnancy queasiness can hit at any time. To ease nausea at work:
The body working overtime to support a pregnancy might cause tiredness — and resting during the workday can be tough. It might help to:
To lift correctly, bend at your knees — not at your waist. Keep your back as straight as possible. Use your leg muscles to stand, keeping the object close to your body.
To lift correctly, bend at your knees — not at your waist. Keep your back as straight as possible. Use your leg muscles to stand, keeping the object close to your body.
As pregnancy progresses, everyday activities such as sitting and standing can become uncomfortable. Short, frequent breaks can combat fatigue. Moving around every few hours also can ease muscle tension and help prevent fluid buildup in the legs and feet. Try these other strategies, too:
Stress on the job can sap needed energy. To minimize workplace stress:
Certain working conditions might increase the risk of complications during pregnancy — especially for those at high risk of preterm labor. Those working conditions include:
Also, getting vaccinations recommended by your health care provider will help keep you safe at work and home.
If you're concerned about any of these issues, mention it to your health care provider. Together you can decide if you need to take special precautions or modify your work duties during your pregnancy.

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.