Early detection in boys can help prevent problems from delayed puberty. Early diagnosis and treatment in men offer better protection against osteoporosis and other related conditions.
Your health care provider will conduct a physical exam and note whether your sexual development, such as your pubic hair, muscle mass and size of your testes, is consistent with your age.
Your provider will test your blood level of testosterone if you have signs or symptoms of hypogonadism. Because testosterone levels vary and are generally highest in the morning, blood testing is usually done early in the day, before 10 a.m., possibly on more than one day.
If tests confirm that you have low testosterone, further testing can determine if a testicular disorder or a pituitary abnormality is the cause. These studies might include:
Testosterone replacement can raise testosterone levels and help ease the symptoms of male hypogonadism. These include less desire for sex, less energy, less facial and body hair, and loss of muscle mass and bone mass.
For older adults who have low testosterone and symptoms of hypogonadism due to aging, it's less clear how well testosterone replacement works.
Anyone taking testosterone replacement should have a medical checkup and blood tests several times during the first year of treatment and yearly after that. This is to see how well the treatment works and to watch for side effects.
Testosterone taken by mouth, also called oral, isn't often used for treatment of hypogonadism. Oral testosterone can cause serious liver problems. And it doesn't keep testosterone levels even.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved one oral testosterone replacement, testosterone undecanoate (Jatenzo, Tlando, Kyzatrex). The lymph system absorbs it, so it might not cause the liver problems seen with other oral forms of testosterone. It's not used to treat hypogonadism caused by aging.
Other forms you might choose can depend on how easy they are to get and use, how much they cost, and whether insurance covers them. They include:
Gels. There are several available with different ways of applying them. Depending on the brand, you rub the testosterone into your skin on your upper arm or shoulder (AndroGel, Testim, Vogelxo) or apply it to the front and inner thigh (Fortesta).
The body soaks in testosterone through the skin. Don't shower or bathe for several hours after a using a gel to give it time to soak in.
Side effects include skin irritation and, if someone touches you, having the medicine get on someone else. Don't let your skin touch anyone until the gel is fully dry. Or cover the area after putting on the gel.
Shot. Testosterone cypionate (Depo-Testosterone) and testosterone enanthate (Xyosted) are given in a muscle or under the skin. Symptoms might vary between doses depending on how often you get the shots.
You or a family member can learn to give testosterone shots at home. If you're not OK with giving yourself shots, a member of your care team can do it for you.
The shot form of testosterone undecanoate (Aveed) goes deep into a muscle, typically every 10 weeks. A member of your medical team must give it. It can have serious side effects.
Gum and cheek, also called buccal cavity. Small and puttylike, gum-and-cheek testosterone replacement sends testosterone through the area above the top teeth where the gum meets the upper lip, called the buccal cavity.
This product, taken three times a day, sticks to the gumline and sends testosterone into the bloodstream. It can irritate the gum.
Testosterone therapy carries risks, including:
Risks from testosterone therapy are most often due to doses that are too high. Many of these side effects go away when the dose is lowered. That's why it's so important to have regular follow-up visits with a health care professional, who will monitor the testosterone levels in your blood.
If a pituitary problem is the cause, pituitary hormones can be given to help the body make more sperm and restore fertility. A pituitary tumor may need treatment with surgery, medicine, radiation or replacement of other hormones.
There's often no way to help men with primary hypogonadism make sperm. But there are ways to help couples who haven't been able to have children. Assisted reproductive technology offers ways to help.
Treatment of delayed puberty in boys depends on the cause. Three to six months of testosterone shots can help start puberty. The testosterone can help increase muscle mass, beard and pubic hair growth, and growth of the penis. This treatment is given only if the bones have matured enough.
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Having male hypogonadism can affect your self-image and, possibly, your relationships. Talk with your health care provider about how you can reduce the anxiety and stress that often accompany these conditions. Many men benefit from psychological or family counseling.
Find out if there are support groups in your area or online. Support groups put you in touch with other people with similar challenges.
Although you're likely to start by seeing your family doctor or other care provider, you might be referred to someone who specializes in the hormone-producing glands (endocrinologist).
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For male hypogonadism, some questions to ask your provider include:
Be prepared to answer questions about your condition, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.