Your child's healthcare professional looks for signs of developmental delays at regular well-child checkups. If your child shows any symptoms of autism, you'll likely be referred to a specialist who treats children with autism spectrum disorder for an evaluation. This specialist could be a child psychiatrist or psychologist, a pediatric neurologist, or a developmental pediatrician.
Because autism spectrum disorder symptoms and how severe they are can vary widely, it may be hard to make a diagnosis. There is no specific medical test to diagnose autism spectrum disorder. Instead, a specialist may:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your autism spectrum disorder-related health concerns
					Start Here


There is no cure for autism spectrum disorder, and there is no one-size-fits-all treatment. Treatment seeks to support your child's learning, development and behavior. Getting treated early, during the preschool years, can help your child learn critical social, communication, functional and behavioral skills.
The range of home-based and school-based treatments for autism spectrum disorder can be overwhelming, and your child's needs may change over time. Your healthcare professional can recommend options and help find resources in your area.
If your child is diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, talk with experts about creating a treatment strategy and build a team of health professionals to meet your child's needs.
In addition to autism spectrum disorder, children, teenagers and adults also can have:
Children with autism spectrum disorder usually continue to learn and come up with ways to handle challenges throughout life. But many continue to need some level of support. Planning for your child's future opportunities can make this process smoother. This includes where to work, go to school and live, and the services required for support, as well as how to be independent and social.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Because autism spectrum disorder can't be cured, many parents seek alternative or complementary therapies. But there's little or no research on these therapies to show whether they're helpful. And some alternative treatments could be dangerous.
Talk with your child's healthcare professional about whether research supports any therapy that you're thinking about for your child.
Examples of complementary and alternative therapies that may offer some benefit when used along with proven treatments include:
Some complementary and alternative therapies may not be harmful, but there's no evidence that they help. Some also may be costly and hard to carry out. Examples of these therapies include:
Some complementary and alternative treatments aren't proved to help, and they could be dangerous. Examples of complementary and alternative treatments that aren't recommended for autism spectrum disorder include:
Raising a child with autism spectrum disorder can tire you physically and drain you emotionally. These suggestions may help:
Your child's healthcare professional looks for developmental issues at regular checkups. Mention any concerns you have during your appointment. If your child shows any signs of autism spectrum disorder, your child likely will be referred for an evaluation by a specialist who treats children with the condition.
Bring a family member or friend with you to the appointment, if possible, to help you remember information and for emotional support.
Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment.
Before your child's appointment, make a list of:
Questions to ask your child's healthcare professional may include:
Don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your child's healthcare professional is likely to ask you several questions. Be ready to answer them to reserve time to go over any points you want to focus on. Your healthcare professional may ask:

Autism spectrum disorder care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.