Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A step-by-step guide explaining what to do in a choking emergency.
If a person is choking and cannot talk, cry or laugh forcefully, give five back blows and then five abdominal thrusts.
If a person is choking and cannot talk, cry or laugh forcefully, give five back blows and then five abdominal thrusts.
How to perform abdominal thrusts, also called the Heimlich maneuver, on yourself
To perform abdominal thrusts, also called the Heimlich maneuver, on yourself, place a fist slightly above your navel. Grasp your fist with the other hand and bend over a hard surface. Shove your fist inward and upward.
To perform abdominal thrusts, also called the Heimlich maneuver, on yourself, place a fist slightly above your navel. Grasp your fist with the other hand and bend over a hard surface. Shove your fist inward and upward.
Choking happens when an object lodges in the throat or windpipe blocking the flow of air. In adults, a piece of food is usually to blame. Young children often choke on small objects. Choking is life-threatening. It cuts off oxygen to the brain.
Give first aid as quickly as possible if you or someone else is choking. To prepare yourself for these situations, learn the Heimlich maneuver and CPR in a certified first-aid training course.
If you're the only rescuer, give back blows and abdominal thrusts first. Then call 911 or your local emergency number for help. If another person is there, have that person call for help while you give first aid.
If you're alone and choking, call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Then, give yourself abdominal thrusts, also called the Heimlich maneuver, to remove the stuck object.
To clear the airway of a choking infant younger than age 1:
If a choking person can cough forcefully, let the person keep coughing.
Coughing might naturally remove the stuck object.
If a person can't cough, talk, cry or laugh forcefully, give first aid to the person.
The American Red Cross recommends the following steps:
Some sources only teach the abdominal thrust. It's OK not to use back blows if you haven't learned the back-blow technique. Both approaches are acceptable for adults and children older than age 1.
If you're the only rescuer, give back blows and abdominal thrusts first. Then call 911 or your local emergency number for help. If another person is there, have that person call for help while you give first aid.
If the person becomes unconscious, start standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) with chest compressions and rescue breaths.
If the person is pregnant or if you can't get your arms around the stomach, give chest thrusts:
Call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Then, give yourself abdominal thrusts, also called the Heimlich maneuver, to remove the stuck object.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.