Persistent post-concussive symptoms are symptoms of a mild traumatic brain injury that typically last longer than three months. Persistent post-concussive symptoms also are called post-concussion syndrome. The symptoms may include headaches, dizziness, and trouble with concentration and memory. Symptoms can last weeks to months.
A mild traumatic brain injury is known as a concussion. A concussion may be caused by a fall, car accident or contact sports injury. Other causes include violent shaking and movement of the head or body.
You don't have to lose consciousness to get a concussion. And a concussion doesn't always cause persistent post-concussive symptoms. The risk of having persistent post-concussive symptoms doesn't appear to be linked to how severe the injury was.
Persistent post-concussive symptoms in most people appear within the first 7 to 10 days after an injury and typically last longer than three months. But sometimes they can last for a year or more. The goal of treatment is to manage symptoms and to improve functioning and quality of life.
Persistent post-concussive symptoms can be different in each person. They may include:
Headaches after a concussion most often feel like migraines. The headaches also might feel like tension-type headaches, which may be related to a neck injury that happened at the same time as the head injury.
See a healthcare professional if you experience a head injury that causes confusion, memory loss, vision changes, nausea, vomiting or a sudden, bad headache. Get medical help even if you never lost consciousness. Also see a healthcare professional if you lose feeling, can't move a part of your body, or have trouble speaking or writing.
If you get a concussion while playing a sport, don't go back into the game. Seek medical help so that the injury doesn't get worse.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
More research is needed to better understand how and why persistent post-concussive symptoms happen after some injuries and in some people but not in others.
Persistent post-concussive symptoms may result directly from the impact of the injury itself. Or symptoms may trigger other conditions such as migraines. Symptoms also may be related to other factors. These may include trouble with sleep, dizziness, stress and mental health. Your healthcare professional works with you to understand the cause of your symptoms and which treatments may help.
Risk factors for developing persistent post-concussive symptoms include:
The only known way to prevent persistent post-concussive symptoms is to avoid a head injury in the first place. You can't always prevent a head injury. But some tips for avoiding them include:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.