Guillain-Barre syndrome can be hard to diagnose in its earliest stages. Its symptoms are similar to those of other conditions and may vary from person to person.
Your healthcare professional starts with a medical history and thorough physical exam.
Your healthcare professional may then recommend:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Guillain-Barre syndrome-related health concerns
					Start Here


There's no cure for Guillain-Barre syndrome. But two types of treatments can speed recovery and reduce symptoms:
These treatments are equally effective. Mixing them or using one after the other is no more effective than using either method alone.
You are also likely to be given medicine to:
People with Guillain-Barre syndrome need physical help and therapy before and during recovery. Your care may include:
Recovery can take months and even years. But most people with Guillain-Barre syndrome experience this general timeline:
Among adults recovering from Guillain-Barre syndrome:
Children rarely develop Guillain-Barre syndrome. When they do, they generally recover more completely than adults.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
A diagnosis of Guillain-Barre syndrome can be emotionally hard. Although most people eventually recover fully, the condition is generally painful and requires hospitalization and months of rehabilitation. People with Guillain-Barre syndrome must adjust to limited mobility and fatigue.
To manage the stress of recovery from Guillain-Barre syndrome, consider these suggestions:
You may be referred to a doctor who specializes in disorders of the brain and nervous system, known as a neurologist.
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
You're likely to be asked several questions. Being ready to answer them may leave time to go over points you want to spend more time on. You may be asked:

Guillain-Barre syndrome care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.