Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
When depression symptoms improve after starting an antidepressant, many people need to continue taking the medicine a long time to keep symptoms from coming back.
For some people, an antidepressant may simply stop working over time. This is called antidepressant tolerance. Healthcare professionals don't fully understand what causes antidepressant tolerance, also called tachyphylaxis, to happen. They also aren't sure why it happens for some people and not others.
There also can be specific reasons an antidepressant no longer works, such as:
For most people, depression symptoms get better again with changes to medicine. Your healthcare professional may recommend that you change the dose of your current antidepressant, change to another antidepressant, or add another antidepressant or other type of medicine to your current treatment. Don't make any changes without the advice of your doctor or other healthcare professional. Adding talk therapy, also called psychotherapy, to your treatment plan may help too.
There are many reasons depression treatment can stop working. It may help to see a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions, called a psychiatrist. Together you can decide on the best course of action.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.