Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
To prevent or relieve mild headaches during pregnancy without taking medicine, try the following:
Most pregnant people can safely take acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) to treat headaches that happen once in a while. Your healthcare professional may suggest other medicines as well. Always check with a member of your healthcare team before you take any new medicine or herbal treatment. That way, you can find out if the treatment is safe for you and your baby.
Headaches during pregnancy are common. But call your healthcare professional if you get a headache that causes major pain or lasts a long time. There are many causes of headaches, including some health conditions related to high blood pressure.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.