An ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image. This ultrasound shows a noncancerous liver tumor.
An ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image. This ultrasound shows a noncancerous liver tumor.
A liver biopsy is a procedure to remove a small sample of liver tissue for laboratory testing. A liver biopsy is commonly performed by inserting a thin needle through the skin and into the liver.
A liver biopsy is a procedure to remove a small sample of liver tissue for laboratory testing. A liver biopsy is commonly performed by inserting a thin needle through the skin and into the liver.
Finding the cause of liver damage and how bad it is help guide treatment. Your healthcare professional starts with a health history and complete physical exam.
Your healthcare professional may then suggest:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your liver disease-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for liver disease depends on the diagnosis. Some liver problems can be treated with lifestyle changes. These might include losing weight or not drinking alcohol. These changes often are part of a medical program that includes watching liver function.
Other liver problems may be treated with medicines or surgery.
Liver disease that causes liver failure may need a liver transplant.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Changing some lifestyle habits often can help improve liver health. If you've been diagnosed with liver disease, your healthcare professional might suggest that you:
No alternative medicine therapies have been proved to treat liver disease. Some studies show possible benefits. But more research is needed.
Some dietary and herbal supplements can harm the liver. More than 1,000 medicines and herbal products have been linked to liver damage. They include:
To protect your liver, it's important to talk with your healthcare professional about the risks before you take any alternative medicines.
You may be sent to a doctor who specializes in the liver, called a hepatologist.
When you make the appointment, ask about anything you need to do, such as not eating before your appointment. Ask a relative or friend to go with you, if possible, to help you remember the information you get.
Be sure to ask all the questions you have.
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.