Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a procedure that uses magnetic fields to stimulate nerve cells in the brain to improve symptoms of major depression. It's called a "noninvasive" procedure because it's done without using surgery or cutting the skin. Approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), TMS usually is used only when other depression treatments haven't been effective.
The FDA also approved TMS for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), migraines and to help people stop smoking when standard treatments haven't worked well. Research continues into other potential uses for TMS, including epilepsy.
When used for depression, OCD and to stop smoking, this treatment involves delivering repeated magnetic pulses, so it's called repetitive TMS or rTMS.
In repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), an electromagnetic coil placed against the scalp creates a magnetic field that stimulates certain areas of the brain.
In repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), an electromagnetic coil placed against the scalp creates a magnetic field that stimulates certain areas of the brain.
During an rTMS session for depression, an electromagnetic coil is placed against the scalp of your head. This coil delivers magnetic pulses that stimulate nerve cells in the region of your brain involved in mood control and depression. It's thought to activate regions of the brain that have decreased activity during depression.
You also may hear the term "deep transcranial magnetic stimulation" or "deep TMS." The difference between rTMS and deep TMS has to do with the type of coil used. The deep TMS coil stimulates deeper and wider areas of the brain, compared with rTMS. Deep TMS coils have been FDA-approved for OCD and to stop smoking.
Although the biology of why TMS works isn't completely understood, the stimulation appears to affect how the brain is working. It seems to ease depression symptoms and improve mood.
There are different ways to perform TMS. Methods may change as experts learn more about the most effective ways to perform treatments.
Depression is a treatable condition. But for some people, standard treatments aren't effective. Repetitive TMS may be used when standard treatments such as medicines, and talk therapy, known as psychotherapy, don't work.
TMS is sometimes used to treat OCD, migraines and to help people stop smoking after other treatments have not been successful.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Repetitive TMS is a noninvasive form of brain stimulation. Unlike vagus nerve stimulation or deep brain stimulation, rTMS does not require surgery or implanting electrodes. And, unlike electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), rTMS doesn't cause seizures or memory loss. It also doesn't require the use of anesthesia, which puts people in a sleep-like state.
Generally, rTMS is considered safe and well-tolerated. However, it can cause some side effects.
Side effects are generally mild to moderate and improve shortly after a session. Side effects decrease over time with more sessions.
Your health care provider can adjust the level of stimulation to reduce symptoms. Or your provider may recommend that you take a pain medicine available without a prescription before the procedure. In some people who get frequent headaches or migraines, TMS triggers headaches, so treatments might need to be stopped.
Serious side effects are rare but may include:
More study is needed to determine whether rTMS may have long-term side effects.
These evaluations help make sure that rTMS is a safe option for you.
Repetitive TMS isn't invasive, doesn't require anesthesia and can be performed on an outpatient basis. While you don't need to arrange for someone to drive you home after treatment, you may prefer to be driven home after the first session to get a sense of how you'll feel afterward.
Before considering treatment, check with your health insurance company to see whether rTMS is covered. Most policies cover rTMS for depression but require certain medical necessity conditions to be met. These conditions include trying a minimum number of antidepressants that have not worked. Repetitive TMS for OCD and for stopping smoking is new enough that most insurance policies don't cover its use for these issues. That may change as its use becomes more widespread.
Repetitive TMS is usually done in a health care provider's office or clinic. It requires a series of treatment sessions to be effective. Generally, sessions are carried out daily, five times a week, for 4 to 6 weeks.
Before treatment begins, your health care provider will need to identify the best place to put the magnet on your head and the best dose of magnetic energy for you. Your first appointment usually lasts about an hour.
During your first appointment, the "mapping" process is performed. Here's what you can likely expect:
The coil placement and dose are usually done only once. This occurs during the first treatment. For all later treatments, the magnet is moved to the treatment position using measurements from the first treatment.
Here's what to expect during each treatment:
You can return to your normal daily activities after your treatment. You might have a headache for a short time afterward. Between treatments, you can usually expect to work and drive.
If rTMS works for you, your depression symptoms may improve or go away completely. Symptom relief may take a few weeks of treatment.
The effectiveness of rTMS may improve as researchers learn more about techniques, the number of stimulations needed and the best sites on the brain to stimulate.
After completing an rTMS treatment series for depression, standard care — such as medicine and talk therapy — may be recommended as ongoing treatment.
It's not yet known if maintenance rTMS sessions will benefit your depression. This involves continuing treatment when you are symptom-free with the hope that it will prevent the return of symptoms.
If your depression improves with rTMS for at least 2 to 3 months and then you have symptoms later, you can repeat rTMS treatment. Most insurance companies will cover repeat treatment.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    

Transcranial magnetic stimulation care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.