A thorough exam and appropriate diagnostic tests are essential for an accurate diagnosis. A misdiagnosed penicillin allergy may result in the use of less-appropriate or more-expensive antibiotics.
Your doctor will conduct a physical examination, ask questions about your symptoms and order additional tests. You may be referred to an allergy specialist (allergist) for these tests. These may include the following.
With a skin test, the allergist or nurse administers a small amount of the suspect penicillin to your skin with a tiny needle. A positive reaction to a test will cause a red, itchy, raised bump.
A positive result indicates a high likelihood of penicillin allergy. A negative test result usually means you're not at high risk of an allergy to penicillin. But a negative result is more difficult to interpret because some kinds of drug reactions cannot be detected by skin tests.
If the diagnosis of a penicillin allergy is uncertain, a graded drug challenge may be recommended. With this procedure, you receive up to five doses of the suspect penicillin, starting with a small dose and increasing to the desired dose. If you reach the therapeutic dose with no reaction, then your doctor will conclude you aren't allergic to that type of penicillin. You will be able to take the drug as prescribed.
If you are allergic to one type of penicillin, your doctor may recommend a graded challenge with a type of penicillin or cephalosporin that's less likely — because of known chemical properties — to cause an allergic reaction. This would enable your doctor to identify an antibiotic that can be used safely.
During a drug challenge, your doctor provides careful supervision, and supportive care services are available to treat an adverse reaction.
Interventions for a penicillin allergy can be divided into two general strategies:
The following interventions may be used to treat the symptoms of an allergic reaction to penicillin:
If there are no other suitable antibiotic treatment options available, your doctor may recommend a treatment called drug desensitization that may enable you to take a course of penicillin to treat an infection. With this treatment, you receive a very small dose and then progressively larger doses every 15 to 30 minutes over the course of several hours or a few days. If you can reach the desired dosage with no reaction, then you can continue the treatment.
It's important to take the drug as directed to maintain your tolerance to it during the entire course of treatment. If you need penicillin in the future, you will need to repeat the desensitization treatment.
You're carefully monitored during the intervention, and supportive care is available to treat reactions. Desensitization is not always successful, and there is a risk of serious reactions.
Be prepared to answer the following questions. These details will be important in helping your doctor determine the cause of your symptoms.
You may want to take pictures of any condition, such as a rash or swelling, to show your doctor. These may help your doctor if symptoms have subsided by the time of your appointment.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.