Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Caring for a loved one strains even the most resilient people. If you're a caregiver, take steps to preserve your own health and well-being.
As the population ages, more people are doing caregiving. About 1 in 3 adults in the United States is an informal or family caregiver.
A caregiver is anyone who helps another person in need. A person in need might be an ill spouse or partner, a child with a disability, or an aging friend or relative.
Caregivers report higher levels of stress than do people who are not caregivers. It's important for caregivers to know that they, too, need help and support.
Caregiving can have many rewards. For most caregivers, caring for a loved one feels good. And it can make your relationship stronger.
But the demands of caregiving also cause emotional and physical stress. It's common to feel angry, frustrated, worn out or sad. And it's common to feel alone.
Caregiver stress can put caregivers at risk of changes in their own health. Factors that can increase caregiver stress include:
As a caregiver, you may be so focused on your loved one that you don't see how caregiving affects your own health and well-being. The signs of caregiver stress include:
Too much stress over time can harm your health. As a caregiver, you might feel depressed or anxious. You might not get enough sleep or physical activity. Or you might not eat a balanced diet. All of these increase your risk of health conditions, such as heart disease and diabetes.
The emotional and physical demands of caregiving can strain even the strongest person. Many resources and tools can help you care for your loved one and yourself. Make use of them. If you don't take care of yourself, you won't be able to care for anyone else.
Take care of your health. Find ways to sleep better. Move more on most days. Eat a healthy diet. Drink plenty of water.
Many caregivers have trouble sleeping. Good sleep is important for health. If you have trouble getting a good night's sleep, talk to your health care professional.
It may be hard to leave your loved one in someone else's care. But taking a break can be one of the best things you do for yourself and the person you're caring for. Types of respite care include:
Caregivers who work outside the home can feel burdened. If this describes you, think about taking a leave from your job for a time if you can afford to do so.
Employees covered under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act may be able to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave a year to care for relatives. Ask your human resources office about choices for unpaid leave.
Ask for the help you need. Besides asking family and friends, use local resources for caregivers.
To start, check out the national Eldercare Locator or contact your local Area Agency on Aging to learn about services in your area. Or try your state's Aging and Disability Resource Center. You can find these resources online or in a telephone directory.
There also are mobile apps and web-based services that give support to caregivers. These services can help build coping skills and teach about caregiving.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Make a gift before July 31 and it can be doubled in impact thanks to a $100,000 Summer Challenge.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.