Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Many babies spit up. Here's what's behind spitting up and when it might signal a more serious problem.
You've just fed your baby breast milk or formula only to watch the baby spit up what seems like all of it. Is spitting up OK? Find out more about spitting up and what you can do about it.
If the muscle between the esophagus and the stomach relaxes when the stomach is full, food might flow up the baby's esophagus. The muscle is called the lower esophageal sphincter.
If the muscle between the esophagus and the stomach relaxes when the stomach is full, food might flow up the baby's esophagus. The muscle is called the lower esophageal sphincter.
Spitting up is common in babies. During their first three months, about half of all babies do it. The food backs up from the baby's stomach through the same tube that carries food to the stomach, called the esophagus. This condition is called gastroesophageal reflux, infant reflux or infant acid reflux.
A muscle between the esophagus and the stomach keeps food in the stomach. The muscle is called the lower esophageal sphincter. Until this muscle has time to mature, your baby might spit up. This happens mainly when the baby's stomach is full.
It can be hard to tell the difference sometimes. Most often, spitting up is the easy flow of food from the baby's stomach back through the mouth. The baby also might burp. Vomiting might happen with spit up, but it comes out with force. It shoots out of the mouth rather than oozing.
Most often spitting up doesn't affect a baby's growth. Does your baby seem well? Is your baby eating and gaining weight? Then there's little cause for worry.
Keep in mind that when you see how much your baby has spit up based on the size of a spit-up stain, it's easy to think there's more than there is. Babies most often spit up only one or two mouthfuls of breast milk or formula.
Most babies stop spitting up by age 12 months.
Even if your baby spits up, put your baby to sleep on the back. This is to lower the risk of sudden infant death syndrome, also called SIDS. Don't put your baby to sleep on the stomach to try to keep the baby from spitting up.
Certain symptoms might mean an underlying condition or something more serious than just spitting up. Contact your baby's healthcare professional if your baby:
Treatment depends on what's causing your baby to spit up. There might be ways of feeding that can help. Sometimes, a healthcare professional might prescribe medicine to treat reflux.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.