Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Compared with standard flu vaccines, high-dose flu vaccines have more of an ingredient that boosts the immune response. The ingredient is a flu virus antigen called hemagglutinin. High-dose flu vaccines may have 3 to 4 times as much flu virus antigen as the standard flu vaccine.
There's also a flu vaccine that boosts immune response using an ingredient called an adjuvant. These shots have the same amount of flu virus antigen as a standard flu shot. But the adjuvant helps the body respond to the vaccine. This type of flu shot is called an adjuvanted flu vaccine.
High-dose and adjuvanted flu vaccines can help people have a stronger immune response against influenza.
For this reason, high-dose and adjuvanted flu vaccines are recommended for people age 65 and older. These vaccines also are recommended for younger adults, ages 18 to 64, who have had solid organ transplants.
Flu, also called influenza, is an infection of the nose, throat and lungs, which are part of the respiratory system. The flu is caused by a virus. Most people with the flu get better on their own. But influenza can cause serious complications for some groups of people.
Based on past flu seasons, standard flu vaccines may not work as well for people older than age 65 and people who've had organ transplants.
Among people age 65 and older, high-dose and adjuvanted flu vaccines help prevent flu-related hospital stays better than the standard flu vaccines do. That's based on research from past flu seasons.
Among people who've had a solid organ transplant, these types of flu vaccines may boost the immune system's ability to respond to an infection.
But any flu vaccination is better than none. So if you can't get a high-dose or adjuvanted flu vaccine, get the flu vaccine that is offered.
Like other flu vaccines, high-dose and adjuvanted flu vaccines are updated every year. This helps protect against the flu strains most likely to cause the flu during the upcoming flu season.
Compared with the standard flu vaccine, people who get the high-dose vaccine are more likely to have side effects. These include:
Side effects after the high-dose vaccine most often happened during the week after getting the vaccine.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.