Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Learn the steps to use this lifesaving technique to help adults and children.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an emergency treatment that's done when someone's breathing or heartbeat has stopped. For example, when someone has a heart attack or nearly drowns. CPR can help save a life.
The American Heart Association recommends starting CPR by pushing hard and fast on the chest. The pushes are called compressions. This hands-only CPR recommendation is for both people without training and first responders.
Here's CPR advice from the American Heart Association:
The above advice applies to situations in which adults, children and infants need CPR, but not newborns. Newborns are babies up to 4 weeks old.
CPR can keep oxygen-rich blood flowing to the brain and other organs until emergency medical treatment can get the heart beating again. When the heart stops, the body no longer gets oxygen-rich blood. The lack of oxygen-rich blood can cause brain damage in only a few minutes.
If you are not trained but have immediate access to a phone, call 911 or your local emergency number before beginning CPR. The dispatcher can tell you how to do CPR until help arrives. To learn CPR properly, take an accredited first-aid training course. The course should include instructions on CPR and use of an automated external defibrillator (AED).
If you're afraid to do CPR or unsure how to do CPR correctly, know that it's always better to try than to do nothing at all. The difference between doing something and doing nothing could be someone's life.
To do chest compressions, place the lower palm of your hand over the center of the person's chest and your other hand on top of your first hand. Keep your elbows straight. Place your shoulders directly above your hands. Using your upper body weight, push straight down on the chest about 2 inches (5 centimeters). Do not push down more than 2.4 inches (6 centimeters). Push hard and fast for 100 to 120 compressions a minute. If you haven't been trained in CPR, continue chest compressions until there are signs of movement or until emergency medical help takes over. If you have been trained in CPR, go on to rescue breathing.
To do chest compressions, place the lower palm of your hand over the center of the person's chest and your other hand on top of your first hand. Keep your elbows straight. Place your shoulders directly above your hands. Using your upper body weight, push straight down on the chest about 2 inches (5 centimeters). Do not push down more than 2.4 inches (6 centimeters). Push hard and fast for 100 to 120 compressions a minute. If you haven't been trained in CPR, continue chest compressions until there are signs of movement or until emergency medical help takes over. If you have been trained in CPR, go on to rescue breathing.
If you're trained in CPR and you've performed 30 chest compressions, open the person's airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Put your palm on the person's forehead and gently tilt the head back. Then with the other hand, gently lift the chin forward to open the airway.
If you're trained in CPR and you've performed 30 chest compressions, open the person's airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Put your palm on the person's forehead and gently tilt the head back. Then with the other hand, gently lift the chin forward to open the airway.
Open the airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Pinch the nostrils shut for mouth-to-mouth breathing and cover the person's mouth with yours, making a seal. Give the first rescue breath, lasting one second, and watch to see if the chest rises. If it rises, give the second breath. If the chest doesn't rise, repeat the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Then give the second breath. Be careful not to provide too many breaths or to breathe with too much force. After two breaths, start chest compressions again right away to restore blood flow.
Open the airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Pinch the nostrils shut for mouth-to-mouth breathing and cover the person's mouth with yours, making a seal. Give the first rescue breath, lasting one second, and watch to see if the chest rises. If it rises, give the second breath. If the chest doesn't rise, repeat the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver. Then give the second breath. Be careful not to provide too many breaths or to breathe with too much force. After two breaths, start chest compressions again right away to restore blood flow.
The American Heart Association uses the letters C-A-B to help people remember the order to perform the steps of CPR.
Compressions means you use your hands to push down hard and fast in a specific way on the person's chest. Compressions are the most important step in CPR. Follow these steps for performing CPR compressions.
If you're trained in CPR and you've done 30 chest compressions, follow these steps to open the person's airway. This is called the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver.
Rescue breathing can be mouth-to-mouth breathing or mouth-to-nose breathing if the mouth is seriously injured or can't be opened. Current recommendations suggest doing rescue breathing using a bag-mask device with a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
Follow these steps after opening the airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver.
The process for giving CPR to a child age 1 through puberty is essentially the same as that for an adult — follow the C-A-B steps. The American Heart Association says you should not delay CPR and offers this advice on how to perform CPR on a child:
If you are alone and didn't see the child collapse, start chest compressions and continue for about two minutes. Then quickly call 911 or your local emergency number and get an AED if one is available.
If you're alone and you did see the child collapse, call 911 or your local emergency number first. Then get an AED, if available, and start CPR. If another person is with you, have that person call for help and get the AED while you start CPR.
If you're trained in CPR and you've performed 30 chest compressions, open the child's airway using the head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver.
Follow these steps for mouth-to-mouth breathing for a child.
Continue until the child moves or help arrives.
Cardiac arrest in babies is usually due to a lack of oxygen, such as from choking. If you know that the baby has an airway blockage, perform first aid for choking. If you don't know why the baby isn't breathing, perform CPR.
First, study the situation. Touch the baby and watch for a response, such as movement. Don't shake the baby.
If there's no response, call 911 or your local emergency number, then start CPR right away.
Follow the compressions, airway and breathing method for a baby under age 1. Do not follow this procedure for newborns, which include babies up to 4 weeks old.
If you saw the baby collapse, get an AED, if available, before starting CPR. If you're with another person who can help, have that person call for help right away and get the AED while you stay with the baby and perform CPR.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.