Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Living Well / Answers to all your burning sunscreen questions
"Unless you're going to work when it's totally dark out and coming back when it's dark out, you should be applying sunscreen."
Like flossing your teeth or taking your vitamins, slathering on sunscreen is probably something you know you should do every day — but may skip.
Of course, protecting yourself from the sun is important for preventing skin cancer. But if you don’t find that particularly motivating, think about this: Sunscreen is the best anti-aging skin product there is, says Elika Hoss, M.D., a cosmetic dermatologist at Mayo Clinic in Arizona.
“I practice cosmetic dermatology. Most of the patients I see are coming in for wrinkles, brown spots or redness. And all these things are secondary to sunlight,” Dr. Hoss says. “So, from a cosmetic standpoint, sunscreen is actually the number one, two and three anti-aging cream.”
To get the full benefits of sunscreen, you’ll want to make sure you’re applying it correctly. Read on for Dr. Hoss’s answers to all your sun protection questions.
A: To protect your skin, you can use mineral sunscreen, chemical sunscreen and sun protective clothing.
“When it comes to sunscreen, we always say, ‘The best sunscreen is the one that a patient is willing to use.’ So whatever you’re willing to actually put by your toothbrush and put on every morning is better than nothing,” says Dr. Hoss.
All three of these types of protection can protect you from UVA and UVB rays — as long as the sunscreen is labeled “broad spectrum” or “full spectrum.” We generally think of UVB being responsible for sunburn and skin cancer and UVA leading to skin aging, such as brown spots and wrinkles, Dr. Hoss says.
A: You need it every day. Yes, really. Even if you’re only outside in the morning or evening. Even if you’re just driving to your office. Sun comes in through your windows, and windows block UVB, but not UVA rays.
“People don’t realize that they’re getting sun. They just think, ‘Oh, I’m never outside.’ But driving to work, going to the grocery store, walking the dog in the morning, all that sun is cumulative. And over years, depending on other risk factors, this sun exposure could lead to skin cancers, and will definitely lead to skin aging,” Dr. Hoss says. “Unless you’re going to work when it’s totally dark out and coming back when it’s dark out, you should be applying sunscreen.”
A: For your face and neck, a teaspoon will do. For your entire body, you need an ounce of sunscreen, which is the equivalent of 2 tablespoons, or enough to fill a shot glass. If you’re outside longer than two hours, reapply.
And don’t forget your neck and chest — especially if you’re wearing a V-neck or low-cut shirt.
“A lot of women are really good at protecting their face, but they forget about their neck and chest,” says Dr. Hoss. “As a cosmetic dermatologist, I see a lot of patients for sun-damaged skin. And we’ll see that they’ve actually done a good job using products and sunscreen on their face, but they’ve ignored the neck and chest — it looks like two different people.”
A: Probably not. The American Academy of Dermatology recommends a minimum SPF of 30, and a lot of makeup includes only 15 or 20 SPF. Additionally, it may only block UVB rays. Plus, most people only put on a thin layer of makeup — not usually enough to give adequate coverage, Dr. Hoss says.
A: All sunscreens in the U.S. must be approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which is a lengthy and expensive process. But we’re not missing out, Dr. Hoss says.
“We have fewer sunscreens available here,” Dr. Hoss says. “But in general, the physical blockers, just plain old zinc oxide and titanium dioxide are just as good as anything else if used properly.”
A: Dr. Hoss knows people end up writing off sunscreen after experiencing something like an acne breakout or burning in their eyes.
“They just decide, ‘Sunscreen’s not for me; my skin doesn’t like sunscreen,'” Dr. Hoss says. “I think that’s a place where dermatologists can educate patients and give recommendations on more modern sunscreens that might be best for a specific skin type and concern.”
A: “I will always wear a wide-brimmed hat if I’m going for a walk or if I’m going to be at the pool. I utilize long sleeves a lot,” she says. “I really like those sunscreen sticks. They’re great for kids and also good to just throw in your purse and reapply at the end of the workday, during a long drive or at the beach.”
Mayo Clinic A to Z Health Guide, 2nd Edition
A browsable, illustrated one-stop shop for reliable, updated information on the signs, symptoms, tests, treatment and prevention of many common health conditions, from hiccups to cancer.
Discover more Living Well content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jamie M. Bogle, Au.D., Ph.D., Sophie J. Bakri, M.D.

      Elika Hoss, M.D., is a Cosmetic Dermatologist at Mayo Clinic in Arizona. Dr. Hoss has participated in over 20 cosmetic clinical trials. Her interests include treatment of sun-damaged skin with injectables, lasers and energy-based devices. 
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Jamie M. Bogle, Au.D., Ph.D., Sophie J. Bakri, M.D.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.