Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Diagnosing asthma generally includes a medical history, physical exam and lung tests.
An asthma diagnosis is based on several factors, including a detailed medical history, a physical exam, your symptoms, and overall health and test results.
The first step in diagnosing asthma is talking to your healthcare team about your symptoms and your health. This can provide clues as to whether asthma or something else is causing your symptoms. Your care team will likely ask about your symptoms and your exposure to substances that have been linked to asthma. Questions might include:
Your healthcare professional will want to know whether you have common symptoms of asthma, such as:
In children, additional symptoms may signal asthma. These may include:
A spirometer is a diagnostic device that measures the amount of air you're able to breathe in and out and its rate of flow.
A spirometer is a diagnostic device that measures the amount of air you're able to breathe in and out and its rate of flow.
Your healthcare professional may use several tests to check how well your lungs are working.
This is the main test doctors generally use to diagnose asthma in people 5 years or older.
To help determine how well your lungs are working, you take a deep breath and forcefully breathe out into a tube connected to a spirometer. This records both the amount of air you exhale and how quickly you exhale. If certain measurements are below usual for a person your age, it may mean that asthma has narrowed your airways.
After taking lung test measurements, you may be asked to inhale an asthma drug to open air passages and then do the test again. Showing significant improvement after taking the medicine could mean you have asthma.
If your spirometer results are typical or near typical, your healthcare professional might try to trigger asthma symptoms. This is done by having you breathe in a substance that causes the airways to narrow in people with asthma, such as methacholine (meth-uh-KO-leen).
If you appear to have asthma triggered by exercise, called exercise-induced asthma, you may be asked to do physical activity to see whether it triggers symptoms.
After either action, you'll retake the spirometry test. If your spirometry measurements remain typical, you probably don't have asthma. But if your measurements have fallen significantly, it's possible you do.
Lung tests in children under age 5 are not typically done. Instead, diagnosis is generally based on a child's symptoms, medical history and physical examination. It can be especially difficult to diagnose asthma in young children because there are many conditions that cause asthma-like symptoms in this age group.
If your child's healthcare professional suspects asthma, your child may be prescribed a bronchodilator —  a drug that opens the airways. If your child's symptoms improve after using the bronchodilator, your child may have asthma.
You breathe into a tube connected to a machine that measures the amount of nitric oxide gas in your breath. Nitric oxide gas is produced by the body usually, but high levels in your breath can mean that your airways are inflamed — a sign of asthma.
If your healthcare professional suspects that you have a condition in addition to or other than asthma, you may need tests such as:
Your care professional also may want to see whether you have other conditions that often happen with asthma and can worsen symptoms. These include:
Your healthcare professional also may perform allergy tests. These can be skin tests, blood tests or both. Although not used to diagnose asthma, allergy tests can help identify an allergic condition, such as hay fever, that may be causing your symptoms or worsening existing asthma.
Sometimes, diagnosing the cause of breathing problems is a challenge. It can be difficult to tell asthma from other conditions — particularly in young children.
When asthma happens with another condition that affects breathing, it can further complicate diagnosis.
Even if a diagnosis isn't certain, your care professional may prescribe medicines or other treatment to see what helps. It may take time — and patience — to get the correct diagnosis and decide on the best course of treatment.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.