Genes contain DNA — the code that controls much of the body's form and function. DNA controls everything from hair color and height to breathing, walking and digesting food. Genes that don't work properly can cause disease. Sometimes these genes are called mutations.
Gene therapy aims to fix a faulty gene or replace it with a healthy gene to try to cure disease or make the body better able to fight disease. It holds promise as a treatment for a wide range of diseases, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, heart disease, diabetes, hemophilia and AIDS.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved gene therapy products for several conditions, including cancer, spinal muscular atrophy, hemophilia and sickle cell disease. But for most people, gene therapy is available only as part of a clinical trial.
Clinical trials are research studies that help healthcare professionals find out whether a gene therapy approach is safe for people. Clinical trials also help healthcare professionals learn how gene therapy affects the body.
Gene therapy has some potential risks. A gene can't easily be inserted directly into your cells. Rather, it usually is delivered using a carrier called a vector.
The most common gene therapy vectors are viruses. That's because they can recognize certain cells and carry genetic material into the genes of those cells. Researchers change the viruses, replacing genes that cause disease with genes needed to stop disease.
This technique presents risks, including:
Viruses aren't the only vectors that can be used to carry changed genes into your body's cells. Other vectors being studied in clinical trials include:
The FDA and the National Institutes of Health are closely watching the gene therapy clinical trials underway in the U.S. They are making sure patient safety issues are a top priority during research.
Which procedure you have will depend on the disease you have and the type of gene therapy being used. For example, in one type of gene therapy:
In another type of gene therapy, a viral vector is infused directly into the blood or into a selected organ. Talk with your healthcare team to find out what type of gene therapy would be used and what you can expect.
Gene therapy is a promising treatment and a growing area of research. But its clinical use is limited today.
In the U.S., FDA-approved gene therapy products include:
Clinical trials of gene therapy in people have helped treat several diseases and disorders, including:
But several major barriers stand in the way of some types of gene therapy becoming a reliable form of treatment, including:
Cost and insurance coverage also can be a major barrier to treatment.
Although the number of gene therapy products on the market is limited, gene therapy research continues to seek new, effective treatments for various diseases.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies of tests and procedures to help prevent, detect, treat or manage conditions.
    
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.