Vitamin deficiency anemia is a lack of healthy red blood cells caused by lower than usual amounts of vitamin B-12 and folate.
This can happen if you don't eat enough foods containing vitamin B-12 and folate, or if your body has trouble absorbing or processing these vitamins.
Without these nutrients, the body produces red blood cells that are too large and don't work properly. This reduces their ability to carry oxygen.
Symptoms can include fatigue, shortness of breath and dizziness. Vitamin supplements, taken by pill or injection, can correct the deficiencies.
Vitamin deficiency anemia usually develops slowly over several months to years. Signs and symptoms may be subtle at first but usually increase as the deficiency worsens. These may include:
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Vitamin deficiency anemia can occur if you don't eat enough foods containing vitamin B-12 and folate, or if your body has trouble absorbing or processing these vitamins.
Low levels of vitamin B-12 can be caused by:
Also known as vitamin B-9, folate is a nutrient found mainly in dark green leafy vegetables and liver. A folate deficiency can occur when people don't eat foods containing folate or their bodies are unable to absorb folate from food.
Pregnant women and women who are breastfeeding have an increased demand for folate, as do people undergoing dialysis for kidney disease.
A lack of folate can cause birth defects during pregnancy. However, folate deficiency is less common now in countries that routinely add folate to food products such as breads, cereals and pasta.
Things that may increase your risk of vitamin deficiency anemia include:
Being deficient in vitamin B-12 or folate increases your risk of many health problems, including:
You can prevent some forms of vitamin deficiency anemia by choosing a healthy diet that includes a variety of foods.
Most adults need these daily dietary amounts of the following vitamins:
Pregnant and breastfeeding women may require more of each vitamin.
Most people get enough vitamins from the foods they eat. But if your diet is restricted or you've had gastric bypass surgery, you may wish to take a multivitamin.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.