Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
From your first period to perimenopause and beyond, dealing with women’s health issues can be a bewildering experience. When something seems wrong, you may wonder: Is this normal? Why didn’t anybody tell me about this? What do I do now?
Think of the Women’s Health content as that close doctor-friend you can text with a question — and get a straight, understandable answer. Led by medical editor Denise M. Millstine, M.D., this blog taps the expertise of the women’s health experts at Mayo Clinic. These experts are recognized nationally and internationally for their innovative approaches to treatment and a commitment to integrating sex and gender concepts into clinical care, research and education.
In sum, you get world-class medical answers backed by evidence, but without the intimidation factor. So let’s sit down and start talking.
C. difficile recurrence: How to lower your risk
No ride home? What to do instead of canceling your procedure
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL): Understanding the difference between fixed duration and continuous treatment
Primary biliary cholangitis: Tests and treatments you can expect
What is hormone receptor (HR)-negative, HER2-negative breast cancer?
by Paul Cerrato, M.A., John D. Halamka, M.D., M.S.
by Zaraq Khan, M.B.B.S., Samir Babayev, M.D., Chandra C. Shenoy, M.D.
by Zaraq Khan, M.B.B.S., Samir Babayev, M.D., Chandra C. Shenoy, M.D.
by Tufia C. Haddad, M.D., Kathryn J. Ruddy, M.D., M.P.H.
by Mary I. O’Connor, M.D., Kanwal L. Haq, M.S.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.