Your healthcare professional will likely ask about your medical history, review the medicines you take and conduct a physical exam. Your health professional may order tests to determine what's causing your diarrhea. Possible tests include:
Most cases of sudden diarrhea clear on their own within a couple of days without treatment. If you've tried lifestyle changes and home remedies for diarrhea without success, your healthcare professional might recommend medicines or other treatments.
Antibiotics or antiparasitic medicines might help treat diarrhea caused by certain bacteria or parasites. Most bacterial causes of diarrhea do not need treatment in most people. If a virus is causing your diarrhea, antibiotics won't help.
Your healthcare professional likely will advise you to replace the fluids and salts that you lose when you have diarrhea. For most adults, that means drinking water with electrolytes, juice or broth. If drinking liquids upsets your stomach or causes vomiting, your healthcare professional might give you IV fluids.
Water is a good way to replace fluids, but it doesn't contain the salts and electrolytes — minerals such as sodium and potassium — that your body needs to function. You can help maintain your electrolyte levels by drinking fruit juices for potassium or eating soups for sodium. But certain fruit juices, such as apple juice, might make diarrhea worse.
For children, ask your doctor about using an oral rehydration solution, such as Pedialyte, to prevent dehydration or replace lost fluids.
If your healthcare professional determines that an antibiotic caused your diarrhea, you might be given a lower dose or a different medicine.
If your diarrhea is caused by a more serious condition, such as inflammatory bowel disease, your healthcare professional works to control that condition. You might be referred to a specialist, such as a gastroenterologist, who can help devise a treatment plan for you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Diarrhea usually clears up quickly without treatment. To help you cope with your symptoms until the diarrhea goes away, try to do the following:
Ask about antidiarrheal medicines. Nonprescription antidiarrheal medicines, such as loperamide and bismuth subsalicylate, might help reduce how often you pass watery stool and control severe symptoms.
Certain medical conditions and infections — bacterial and parasitic — can be worsened by these medicines because they prevent your body from getting rid of what's causing the diarrhea. Some of these medicines are not recommended for children. Check with your healthcare professional before taking these medicines or giving them to a child.
You might start by seeing a member of your primary healthcare team. If you have lasting diarrhea, you may be referred to a doctor who specializes in the digestive system, called a gastroenterologist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
When you make the appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do in advance, such as fast before certain tests. Make a list of:
For diarrhea, some basic questions to ask include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask you questions, including:
While you wait for your appointment, you may ease your symptoms if you:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.