A visit to a Mayo Clinic travel medicine clinic before you depart on an international trip can help ensure a safer, smoother experience.
If you're planning a trip overseas, make one of your first stops a consultation with specialists in the travel medicine clinics at Mayo's campuses in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota. Availability of services may vary among locations. Please confirm when you request an appointment.
You meet with a travel medicine specialist who is knowledgeable about current health risks worldwide and who will promote safe and healthy travels by offering counseling, recommendations, vaccinations, prescriptions and, if needed, a referral to another expert for complex medical conditions.
You might be eligible for virtual pretravel consultations. If you're interested in this option, talk with the patient appointment specialist when you contact us to schedule an appointment.
International travel has become more complex due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and some countries have exit and entry requirements. Your travel medicine specialist will be able to help you prepare for these requirements so that you have a smoother travel experience.
Schedule an appointment for a pretravel consultation with a Mayo Clinic travel medicine clinic well before you depart so the travel medicine specialist can help you prepare. Ideally, this appointment would occur as soon as travel plans are established and at least two weeks — and preferably 4-8 weeks — before departure. When requesting an appointment for pretravel consultation, be prepared to inform the patient appointment specialist of the following:
At or preferably before the appointment, you will want to provide copies of all available immunization records (including the International Certificate of Vaccination, commonly referred to as the yellow card). Doing so will expedite your clinic visit and may decrease the number of vaccines you are advised to receive.
Your in-depth pre-travel consultation may include:
You will leave your travel medicine clinic appointment with much helpful and up-to-date information.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.