An alanine aminotransferase test, also called an ALT test, is a blood test to check the health of your liver. ALT is a substance found mostly in the liver. If your liver is OK, the ALT level usually stays low. But when liver cells are irritated or damaged, ALT can leak into the bloodstream. So the ALT level can go up.
An ALT test usually isn't done by itself. It's often included in a group of tests called a liver panel or liver function tests. These blood tests also check for other substances related to liver health. Examples of these substances are albumin, bilirubin and aspartate transferase, also called AST.
An ALT test helps look for liver disease or damage. The test may be done as part of routine blood work to check your general health.
Checking your ALT level can help find liver disease or damage early, even before you feel sick.
An ALT test is not used to diagnose liver cancer. But it may be included with other tests as part of a complete workup if your healthcare professional thinks cancer is a possibility.
There's little risk in getting an ALT test. As with any blood test, possible risks may include:
Most people don't need to do anything special to get ready for an ALT blood test. But here are a few helpful things to keep in mind.
You take an ALT test at a medical office, clinic, hospital or lab. If you're anxious about needles or have fainted during a blood test, tell your healthcare team. Also tell the team if you have a bleeding disorder.
A small sample of blood is needed to do an ALT blood test. The healthcare professional uses a small needle to take blood from a vein, usually in your arm. It takes just a few minutes.
You might have a small bruise or feel sore where the needle went in. That usually goes away in a day or two. You likely can return to your daily activities right away.
Your healthcare team gives you the test results. Most people get ALT results in about 1 to 2 days. Test results help your healthcare team plan treatment, if needed.
When looking at your ALT results, keep these things in mind:
Results of an ALT blood test are given in units per liter (U/L). A healthy ALT range hasn't been established for infants. For people age 1 and older, a healthy range is as follows:
Note: Lab ranges may differ depending on the lab doing the test. Ask your healthcare professional what the target ALT goal is for you.
A low ALT level usually isn't a concern. But sometimes it's caused by:
A slight increase in the ALT level may be due to recent vigorous exercise, a fatty meal or some medicines.
A high ALT level may be caused by liver cell damage due to:
Sometimes, an increase in ALT is not related to the liver. That's because some ALT is found in heart and muscle tissue. Other causes of high ALT are:
If your ALT level is high, your healthcare team may:
If you have questions about your test results or next steps, talk with your healthcare professional.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.