Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Infant development milestones for a 10- to 12-month-old include crawling and improved hand-eye coordination.
Babies this age are often on the move. They like nothing more than to drop a spoon from the highchair over and over again. If you aren't saying "No!" now, chances are you've said it in the last few hours. Welcome to life with a 10- to 12-month-old. At this age, infant development is rapid.
From ages 10 to 12 months, your baby is likely to enjoy:
For most babies this age, their curiosity is growing, and your baby is able to move faster than before. An interesting and safe environment can help babies at this age keep learning.
Your baby might reach some developmental milestones ahead of schedule and lag behind a bit on others. It's a good idea, however, to be aware of the signs or symptoms of a problem.
Consult your baby's health care provider if you're concerned about your baby's development or your baby:
Trust your instincts. The earlier a problem is found, the earlier it can be treated. Then you can look forward to the delights and challenges that lie ahead.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.