To diagnose heart failure, your healthcare professional examines you and asks questions about your symptoms and medical history. Your care professional checks to see if you have risk factors for heart failure, such as high blood pressure, coronary artery disease or diabetes.
Your care professional listens to your lungs and heart with a device called a stethoscope. A whooshing sound called a murmur may be heard when listening to your heart. Your care professional may look at the veins in your neck and check for swelling in your legs and belly.
Tests that may be done to diagnose heart failure may include:
During or after testing for heart failure, your healthcare professional may tell you the stage of disease. Staging helps determine the most appropriate treatment. There are two main ways to determine the stage of heart failure:
New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification
This system groups heart failure into four categories by number. You may see Roman numerals used for these category names.
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association classification
This stage-based classification system uses letters A to D. It includes a category for people who are at risk of developing heart failure.
Healthcare professionals often use the classification systems together to help decide the most appropriate treatment options. Your care professional can help you interpret your stage.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your heart failure-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment of heart failure may depend on the cause. Treatment often includes lifestyle changes and medicines. If another health condition is causing the heart to fail, treating it may reverse heart failure.
Some people with heart failure need surgery to open blocked arteries or to place a device to help the heart work better.
With treatment, symptoms of heart failure may improve.
A combination of medicines may be used to treat heart failure. The specific medicines used depend on the cause of heart failure and the symptoms. Medicines to treat heart failure include:
Diuretics. Often called water pills, these medicines make you urinate more frequently. This helps prevent fluid buildup in your body. Diuretics, such as furosemide (Lasix, Furoscix), also decrease fluid in the lungs, so it's easier to breathe.
Some diuretics make the body lose potassium and magnesium. Your healthcare professional may recommend supplements to treat this. If you're taking a diuretic, you may have regular blood tests to check your potassium and magnesium levels.
Potassium-sparing diuretics. Also called aldosterone antagonists, these medicines include spironolactone (Aldactone, CaroSpir) and eplerenone (Inspra). They may help people with severe heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) live longer.
Unlike some other diuretics, these medicines can raise the level of potassium in the blood to dangerous levels. Talk with your healthcare professional about your diet and potassium intake.
Your healthcare professional may need to change your medicine doses frequently. This is more common when you've just started a new medicine or when your condition is getting worse.
You may need to stay in the hospital if you have a flare-up of heart failure symptoms. While in the hospital, you may receive:
If you have severe heart failure, you may need to use supplemental oxygen for a long time.
Surgery or other treatment to place a heart device may be recommended to treat the condition that led to heart failure.
Surgery or other procedures for heart failure may include:
Heart valve repair or replacement. If a damaged heart valve causes heart failure, your care professional may recommend repairing or replacing the valve. There are many different types of heart valve surgery. The type needed depends on the cause of the heart valve disease.
Heart valve repair or replacement may be done as open-heart or minimally invasive surgery.
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). An ICD is used to prevent complications of heart failure. It isn't a treatment for heart failure itself. An ICD is a device similar to a pacemaker. It's implanted under the skin in the chest with wires leading through the veins and into the heart.
The ICD checks the heartbeat. If the heart starts beating at a dangerous rhythm, the ICD tries to correct the beat. If the heart stops, the device shocks it back into regular rhythm. An ICD can also work as a pacemaker and speed up a slow heartbeat.
Ventricular assist device (VAD). A VAD helps pump blood from the lower chambers of the heart to the rest of the body. It's also called a mechanical circulatory support device. Although a VAD can be placed in one or both lower chambers of the heart, it's usually placed in the lower left one.
Your healthcare professional may recommend a VAD if you're waiting for a heart transplant. Sometimes, a VAD is used as a permanent treatment for people who have heart failure but who aren't good candidates for a heart transplant.
Heart transplant. Some people have such severe heart failure that surgery or medicines don't help. These people may need to have their hearts replaced with a healthy donor heart.
A heart transplant isn't the right treatment for everyone. A team of healthcare professionals at a transplant center helps determine whether the procedure may be safe and beneficial for you.
Your healthcare professional may recommend special medical care to reduce symptoms and improve quality of life. This is called palliative care. Anyone who has a serious or life-threatening illness can benefit from this type of care. It can be used to treat symptoms of the disease or to ease the side effects of treatment.
In some people with heart failure, medicines no longer work and a heart transplant or device isn't an option. If this occurs, special end-of-life care may be recommended. This is called hospice care.
Hospice care allows family and friends — with the aid of nurses, social workers and trained volunteers — to care for and comfort a loved one. Hospice care is available in your home or in nursing homes and assisted living centers.
Hospice care provides the following for those who are sick and their loved ones:
Although it can be difficult, discussing end-of-life issues with your family and medical team is important. Part of this discussion will likely involve an advance care directive. This is a general term for spoken and written instructions you give concerning your medical care, should you become unable to speak for yourself.
If you have an ICD, one important consideration to discuss with your family and healthcare team is whether the ICD should be turned off so that it can't deliver shocks to make your heart continue beating.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free, and receive heart transplant and heart
                            failure content, plus expertise on heart health.
ErrorSelect
                                        a location
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You will receive the first heart failure and transplantation email in your inbox shortly. When seeking answers, people often look to experts for clear and accurate information. By subscribing to heart failure content from Mayo Clinic, you have taken an important first step in gaining knowledge and using it for your overall health and well-being.
If you don't receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.
                            

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Some people with heart failure may be told to take omega-3 fatty acid supplements. Some research shows that the supplements may help reduce the need for hospital stays.
Making certain lifestyle changes often improve heart failure symptoms. They may even stop the condition from getting worse.
The following changes are recommended to improve heart health:
Limit salt. Too much salt, also called sodium, can make the body hold onto water. This is called water retention. It makes the heart work harder. Symptoms include shortness of breath and swollen legs, ankles and feet.
Ask your healthcare professional if you should follow a no-salt or low-salt diet. Remember that salt is already added to prepared foods.
Reduce stress. Strong emotions such as anxiety or anger can make the heart beat faster. Breathing becomes heavier and blood pressure goes up. These changes can make heart failure worse.
Find ways to reduce emotional stress. Practicing mindfulness and connecting with others in support groups are some ways to reduce and manage stress.
Managing heart failure requires open communication between you and your healthcare professional. Be honest about any challenges concerning your diet, lifestyle and medicine use. Pay attention to your body and how you feel. Tell your care professional when you're feeling better or worse. This helps your healthcare professional know what treatment works best for you.
These steps may help you manage heart failure:
If are worried about your heart failure risk, make an appointment with your healthcare professional. You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases. This type of doctor is called a cardiologist. If heart failure is found early, treatment may be easier and more effective.
Appointments can be brief. Because there's often a lot to discuss, it's a good idea to be prepared for your appointment. Here's some information to help you get ready.
Your time with your care professional is limited, so preparing a list of questions will help you make the most of your time together. List your questions from most important to least important in case time runs out. For heart failure, some basic questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask many questions. Being ready to answer them may save time to go over any details you want to spend more time on. Your care professional may ask:
It's never too early to make healthy lifestyle changes, such as quitting smoking, cutting down on salt and eating healthy foods. These changes can help prevent heart failure from starting or worsening.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.