Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
A breast lump or breast changes need medical attention. Know what to expect during a clinical breast exam and what happens when a breast lump or change needs more study.
Finding a breast lump or other change in a breast might cause worry about breast cancer.
Worry is common. Breast lumps also are common. But most breast lumps are not cancer. This is especially true for younger women. Breast lumps that are not cancer are called benign.
Still, have a healthcare professional look at any breast lump. Be sure to have a healthcare professional check a new lump or a lump that's still there after a month or two. Also see a healthcare professional if one breast doesn't feel the same as the other breast.
Breast tissues include fat, glands and tissue that gives support, called connective tissue. Some breast-related symptoms, such as feeling tender or lumpy, change with the menstrual cycle. Extra fluid in the breasts during this time might cause lumps. Breast tissue also changes during pregnancy and menopause and while taking hormones.
Breast and nipple changes can be a sign of breast cancer. Make an appointment with your health care provider if you notice anything unusual.
Breast and nipple changes can be a sign of breast cancer. Make an appointment with your health care provider if you notice anything unusual.
Knowing how your breasts feel most of the time makes it easier to know when there's a change.
Reasons to talk with a healthcare professional include:
Learning about a breast lump most often begins with a breast exam. During this exam, a healthcare professional:
If you have a breast lump or other area of concern, talk with your healthcare professional about testing.
Getting a breast MRI involves lying face down on a padded scanning table. The breasts fit into a hollow space in the table. The hollow space has coils that get signals from the MRI. The table slides into the large opening of the MRI machine.
Getting a breast MRI involves lying face down on a padded scanning table. The breasts fit into a hollow space in the table. The hollow space has coils that get signals from the MRI. The table slides into the large opening of the MRI machine.
During fine-needle aspiration, a healthcare professional puts a special needle into a breast lump and removes any fluid. This is called aspiration. The healthcare professional may use ultrasound to place the needle. An ultrasound is a procedure that uses sound waves to make pictures of the breast on a screen.
During fine-needle aspiration, a healthcare professional puts a special needle into a breast lump and removes any fluid. This is called aspiration. The healthcare professional may use ultrasound to place the needle. An ultrasound is a procedure that uses sound waves to make pictures of the breast on a screen.
A core needle biopsy uses a long, hollow tube to get a sample of tissue. Here, a biopsy of a suspicious breast lump is being done. The sample is sent to a lab for testing by doctors called pathologists. They specialize in the study of blood and body tissue.
A core needle biopsy uses a long, hollow tube to get a sample of tissue. Here, a biopsy of a suspicious breast lump is being done. The sample is sent to a lab for testing by doctors called pathologists. They specialize in the study of blood and body tissue.
During a stereotactic breast biopsy, two plates firmly press the breast between them. X-rays called mammograms make pictures of the area from different angles. This finds the exact place for the biopsy. A health professional uses a needle to take a sample of breast tissue in the area of concern.
During a stereotactic breast biopsy, two plates firmly press the breast between them. X-rays called mammograms make pictures of the area from different angles. This finds the exact place for the biopsy. A health professional uses a needle to take a sample of breast tissue in the area of concern.
Learning more about a breast lump may involve:
This test involves a healthcare professional removing a tissue sample for study under a microscope. Ultrasound or mammography might help guide the needle. There might be a medicine to numb the area, called a local anesthetic.
Most often the radiologist doing the breast biopsy leaves a tiny clip or marker where the sample came from. This makes the area stand out on later imaging tests and marks the site for later surgery if it's needed.
After a biopsy, the tissue sample goes to a lab for study. A healthcare professional explains the results.
If the breast lump isn't cancer, a healthcare professional decides if you need to have breast exams more often or repeat breast imaging within the year to look for other changes on the mammogram. Your healthcare professional may ask you to return in 2 to 3 months to see if there are changes in your breast.
Tell your healthcare professional if you see changes in the lump or get new areas of concern. Even if you had a recent mammogram that looked OK, have your healthcare professional look at any new breast changes.
If it's not clear whether the breast lump is cancer, you may need to see a surgeon or other specialist. A diagnosis might not be clear, for instance, when a clinical breast exam and a mammogram show areas of concern but the biopsy shows no cancer.
A breast lump that's cancer needs treatment. Treatment depends on the tumor type and other factors.

                            There is a problem with information submitted for this request.
                            Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
                        

                        Sign up for free and receive the latest on breast cancer treatment, care
                        and management.
                    


ErrorEmail field is required
                        


ErrorInclude a valid email
                            address
                        
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

                            You'll soon start receiving the latest health information you
                            requested in your inbox.
                        
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.