Mayo Clinic appointments are intentionally unrushed. Still, you'll want to use your time wisely to take advantage of your doctor's expertise and experience.
Consider flexible travel plans. One of Mayo Clinic's immense strengths is thorough, accurate diagnosis. If your first consultation indicates other or underlying conditions, you may need further testing or specialty care that must be scheduled the next day or in following days.
Especially if you're arriving from out of state or abroad, consider flexible travel and lodging plans to allow us to address your full medical needs. As appropriate to your situation, discuss the possibility of a somewhat longer stay with those who need to know.
Carve out a morning or afternoon to get ready for your Mayo Clinic appointment.
Log in to the Patient Online Services portal. You can review your itinerary, see any instructions for your appointments and read messages from your care team.
Need help setting up your online portal? Just call the Patient Online Services help desk at 877-858-0398.
Do your research. If you're not well-versed in the conditions, symptoms, procedures or tests you expect to discuss at Mayo, consider searching reputable websites like MayoClinic.org for trusted information. You may feel more confident going into your appointment with this knowledge.
Helpful hint: When it comes to online sources of health information, stick to respected nonprofit institutions, professional organizations and government agencies, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the American Heart Association website.
Learn more about your care team. You may be more comfortable if you read a little about your doctors in advance or even see a picture.
Understand the process. Mayo Clinic's appointment schedulers create your appointment itinerary based on your current referral or medical information. Appointments may be added or altered during your stay, or even be scheduled for a future time.
In some cases, you may find that you aren't being seen by a department or particular doctor that you'd hoped. But know that your Mayo Clinic team will deliver the best possible care for you. Appointment specialists are specially trained to match you with the provider or group that's the best fit for your diagnosis and your history.
Casual clothes and comfortable shoes can help put you at ease. And don't forget to pack a sweater, socks or blanket — even in the summer, since Mayo Clinic buildings are air-conditioned.
Be on time. Pay close attention to the “Arrival Time” shown on your patient itinerary. This time is calculated based on your specific appointment, and accounts for the amount of time you'll need for check-in and to complete any paperwork or other tasks before meeting with your doctor.
Helpful hint: Make sure to give yourself extra time for parking and walking to your appointment — especially if you're going to a new location for the first time.
Leave with a clear plan. Repeat back any instructions you've been given. Ask your doctor about your next steps. Will you need to schedule follow up appointments? Fill a prescription? Make lifestyle changes? Understand what's expected before you leave.
Helpful hint: A member of your Mayo Clinic care team can print a summary of your visit that includes instructions and next steps.
Your Mayo Clinic visit is the beginning of your journey to better health. Progress may take time, and you may have to adjust your plan as you move forward. But you've taken an important step in prioritizing your health and getting the answers you deserve.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.