To diagnose obesity, your health care professional may perform a physical exam and recommend some tests.
Gathering this information will help you and your health care team choose the type of treatment that will work best for you.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your obesity-related health concerns
					Start Here


The goal of obesity treatment is to reach and stay at a healthy weight. This improves overall health and lowers the risk of developing complications related to obesity.
You may need to work with a team of health professionals — including a dietitian, behavioral counselor or an obesity specialist — to help you understand and make changes in your eating and activity habits.
The first treatment goal is usually a modest weight loss — 5% to 10% of your total weight. That means that if you weigh 200 pounds (91 kilograms), you'd need to lose only about 10 to 20 pounds (4.5 to 9 kilograms) for your health to begin to improve. But the more weight you lose, the greater the benefits.
All weight-loss programs require that you change your eating habits and get more active. The treatment methods that are right for you depend on your weight, your overall health and your willingness to participate in a weight-loss plan.
Reducing calories and practicing healthier eating habits are key to overcoming obesity. Although you may lose weight quickly at first, steady weight loss over the long term is considered the safest way to lose weight. It's also the best way to keep weight off permanently.
There is no best weight-loss diet. Choose one that includes healthy foods that you feel will work for you. Dietary changes to treat obesity include:
Be wary of quick fixes. You may be tempted by fad diets that promise fast and easy weight loss. But the reality is that there are no magic foods or quick fixes. Fad diets may help in the short term, but the long-term results don't appear to be any better than other diets.
Similarly, you may lose weight on a crash diet, but you're likely to regain it when you stop the diet. To lose weight — and keep it off — you must adopt healthy-eating habits that you can maintain over time.
Getting more physical activity or exercise is an essential part of obesity treatment:
A behavior modification program can help you make lifestyle changes to lose weight and keep it off. Steps to take include looking at your current habits to find out what factors, stresses or situations may have contributed to your obesity.
Weight-loss medicines are meant to be used along with diet, exercise and behavior changes, not instead of them. Before selecting a medication for you, your health care professional will consider your health history, as well as possible side effects.
The most commonly used medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of obesity include:
Weight-loss medicines may not work for everyone, and the effects may wane over time. When you stop taking a weight-loss medicine, you may regain much or all of the weight you lost.
These types of procedures don't require any cuts, also called incisions, in the skin. After you are under anesthesia, flexible tubes and tools are inserted through the mouth and down the throat into the stomach. Common procedures include:
Also known as bariatric surgery, weight-loss surgery limits how much food you can eat. Some procedures also limit the amount of calories and nutrients you can absorb. But this also can result in nutritional and vitamin deficiencies.
Weight-loss success after surgery depends on your commitment to making lifelong changes in your eating and exercise habits.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Your effort to overcome obesity is more likely to be successful if you follow strategies at home along with your formal treatment plan. These can include:
Many dietary supplements that promise to help you shed weight quickly are available. The long-term effectiveness and safety of these products are often questionable.
Talk to your health care professional or therapist about improving your coping skills. Consider these tips to cope with obesity and your weight-loss efforts:
Talking to your health care professional openly and honestly about your weight concerns is one of the best things you can do for your health. In some cases, you may be referred to an obesity specialist — if one is available in your area. You also may be referred to a behavioral counselor or dietitian.
Being an active participant in your care is important. One way to do this is by preparing for your appointment. Think about your needs and goals for treatment. Also, write down a list of questions to ask. These questions may include:
Be sure to let your health care team know about any medical conditions you have and about any medicines, vitamins or supplements that you take.
During your appointment, your health care professional is likely to ask you a number of questions about your weight, eating, activity, mood and thoughts, and any symptoms you might have. You may be asked questions such as:
If you have time before your scheduled appointment, you can get ready for the appointment by keeping a diet diary for two weeks before the appointment. You also can record how many steps you take in a day by using a step counter, called a pedometer.
And you can begin to make choices that will help you start to lose weight, including:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Bariatric Surgery & Weight Loss support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.