Matthew Hall, M.D.: Patients can get allergic to various things that they are using, such as soaps, lotions, makeups, anything that contacts the skin.
DeeDee Stiepan: Nickel, which is often used in costume jewelry, is the most common allergen. So how can someone know if they're having an allergic reaction to something they're putting on their skin?
Dr. Hall: Patch testing is the crucial test that we perform to assess for allergic contact dermatitis. It's a weeklong test. We have to see patients on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of the same week.
DeeDee Stiepan: During the initial visit, the dermatologist determines possible risk factors that may be causing the contact dermatitis.
Dr. Hall: Then, based on that, we customize a panel of allergens for each patient that are placed on these aluminum discs that are taped onto the back.
DeeDee Stiepan: After two days, the patient comes back to get the patches removed.
Dr. Hall: But we also have to see the patient back on Friday because it can take 4 to 5 days before we see reactions. So it's a weeklong commitment.
DeeDee Stiepan: At the end of the week, patients are provided with a list of what they're allergic to.
Dr. Hall: We also give them access to a customized database of products that are safe for them to use that do not contain the substances that they are allergic to.
DeeDee Stiepan: For the Mayo Clinic Newsnetwork, I'm DeeDee Stiepan.
Patch testing can be helpful in determining if you're allergic to a specific substance. Small amounts of different substances are placed on your skin under a sticky coating. After 2 to 3 days, your health care provider checks for a skin reaction under the patches.
Patch testing can be helpful in determining if you're allergic to a specific substance. Small amounts of different substances are placed on your skin under a sticky coating. After 2 to 3 days, your health care provider checks for a skin reaction under the patches.
Your health care provider may be able to diagnose contact dermatitis by talking to you about your signs and symptoms. You might be asked questions to help identify the cause of your condition and uncover clues about the trigger substance. And you'll likely undergo a skin exam to assess the rash.
Your health care provider may suggest a patch test to identify the cause of your rash. In this test, small amounts of potential allergens are put on sticky patches. Then the patches are placed on your skin. They stay on your skin for 2 to 3 days. During this time, you'll need to keep your back dry. Then your health care provider checks for skin reactions under the patches and determines whether further testing is needed.
This test can be useful if the cause of your rash isn't apparent or if your rash recurs often. But the redness indicating a reaction can be hard to see on brown or Black skin, which may lead to a missed diagnosis.
If home care steps don't ease your signs and symptoms, your health care provider may prescribe medications. Examples include:
To help reduce itching and soothe inflamed skin, try these self-care approaches:
You're likely to start by seeing your primary care provider, who might then refer you to a doctor who specializes in skin disorders (dermatologist).
Because appointments can be brief, it's a good idea to be well prepared for your appointment.
For contact dermatitis, some basic questions you could ask include:
Your health care provider is likely to ask you questions such as the following:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.