Your health care provider will usually talk with you about your feelings, thoughts and mental health to help determine if you have a short-term case of postpartum baby blues or a more severe form of depression. Don't be embarrassed — postpartum depression is common. Share your symptoms with your provider so that you and your provider can create a useful treatment plan.
As part of your evaluation, your health care provider may do a depression screening, including having you fill out a questionnaire. Your provider may order other tests, if needed, to rule out other causes for your symptoms.
Treatment and recovery time vary, depending on how severe your depression is and what your individual needs are. If you have an underactive thyroid or an underlying illness, your health care provider may treat those conditions or refer you to the appropriate specialist. Your health care provider may also refer you to a mental health professional.
The baby blues usually fade on their own within a few days to 1 to 2 weeks. In the meantime:
Postpartum depression is often treated with psychotherapy — also called talk therapy or mental health counseling — medicine or both.
Brexanolone (Zulresso) is the first drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration specifically for postpartum depression in adult women. Brexanolone slows the rapid drop of certain hormones after childbirth that may lead to postpartum depression. Potential serious side effects require a stay in a health care facility and monitoring by a health care provider while receiving the medicine through a vein over 60 hours. Because of this, the treatment is not yet widely available.
Research continues on an oral medicine for postpartum depression with promising results. The medicine being studied works in a way similar to brexanolone. But it could be taken daily as a pill and may not have the same serious side effects.
With appropriate treatment, postpartum depression symptoms usually improve. In some cases, postpartum depression can continue and become long term, which is called chronic depression. It's important to continue treatment after you begin to feel better. Stopping treatment too early may lead to a relapse.
Postpartum psychosis requires immediate treatment, usually in the hospital. Treatment may include:
A hospital stay during treatment for postpartum psychosis can challenge a mother's ability to breastfeed. This separation from the baby makes breastfeeding difficult. Your health care provider can recommend support for lactation — the process of producing breast milk — while you're in the hospital.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
In addition to professional treatment, you can do some things for yourself that build on your treatment plan and help speed recovery.
Remember, taking care of your baby includes taking care of yourself.
The already stressful, exhausting period following a baby's birth is more difficult when depression occurs. But remember, postpartum depression is never anyone's fault. It's a common medical condition that needs treatment.
So, if you're having trouble coping with postpartum depression, talk with your health care provider. Ask your provider or a therapist about local support groups for new moms or women who have postpartum depression.
The sooner you get help, the sooner you'll be fully equipped to cope with depression and enjoy your new baby.
After your first appointment, your health care provider may refer you to a mental health provider who can create the right treatment plan with you. You may want to find a trusted family member or friend to join you for your appointment to help you remember all the information discussed.
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions during your appointment.
Your health care provider or mental health provider may ask you some questions, such as:
Your provider may ask additional questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing for questions will help you make the most of your appointment.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.