The pyloric valve is a ring-shaped muscle that holds food in the stomach until it is ready for the next stage in the digestive process..
The pyloric valve is a ring-shaped muscle that holds food in the stomach until it is ready for the next stage in the digestive process..
In pyloric stenosis, the muscle of the pyloric valve thickens, blocking food from entering the baby's small intestine.
In pyloric stenosis, the muscle of the pyloric valve thickens, blocking food from entering the baby's small intestine.
Pyloric stenosis (pie-LOHR-ik stuh-NOH-sis) is a narrowing of the opening between the stomach and the small intestine. This uncommon condition in infants can trap food in the stomach.
Typically, a ring-shaped muscular valve closes to hold food in the stomach or opens to allow food to pass into the small intestine. With pyloric stenosis, the muscle tissue is enlarged. The opening becomes very narrow, and little to no food passes into the intestine.
Pyloric stenosis usually leads to forceful vomiting, dehydration, poor nutrition and weight loss. Babies with pyloric stenosis may seem to be hungry all the time.
Pyloric stenosis is treated with surgery.
The passage between the stomach and small intestine is called the pylorus. The valve that controls the opening may be called the pyloric muscle, pyloric sphincter or pyloric valve.
The enlargement of the pyloric muscle is called hypertrophy. Pyloric stenosis also is called hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
Symptoms of pyloric stenosis usually appear within 3 to 6 weeks after birth. Pyloric stenosis is rare in babies older than 3 months.
Other conditions have symptoms like pyloric stenosis. It's important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis. See your baby's doctor if your baby:
The causes of pyloric stenosis are unknown, but genes and environmental factors might play a role. Pyloric stenosis usually isn't present at birth but develops afterward.
Pylorid stenosis is not a common condition. It is more likely in babies who:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.