Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
If diet and exercise don't do enough, you may also need to take medications to help lower your cholesterol.
A healthy lifestyle is the first defense against high cholesterol. But sometimes diet and exercise aren't enough. You might also need to take cholesterol medications to help:
Your doctor might suggest a single drug or a combination of cholesterol medications. Here's an overview of the pros and cons for common classes of cholesterol medications.
In many people, the muscle pain often associated with statins may not actually be caused by the drug. In studies where participants don't know if they're getting a statin or a placebo, muscle pain is a common complaint in both groups. It appears that the expectation of the side effect makes it more likely to occur.
Most cholesterol medications lower cholesterol with few side effects, but effectiveness varies from person to person. It's also still important to follow a healthy diet and get enough exercise. Cholesterol medications and lifestyle choices can work together to help reduce your risk of heart attacks and stroke.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.