To diagnose dermatitis, your doctor will likely look at your skin and talk with you about your symptoms and medical history. You may need to have a small piece of skin removed for study in a lab, which helps rule out other conditions. This procedure is called a skin biopsy.
Your doctor may suggest a patch test to identify the cause of your symptoms. In this test, small amounts of potential allergens are put on sticky patches. Then the patches are placed on your skin. They stay on your skin for 2 to 3 days. During this time, you'll need to keep your back dry. Then your health care provider checks for skin reactions under the patches and determines whether further testing is needed.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your dermatitis-related health concerns
					Start Here


The treatment for dermatitis varies, depending on the cause and your symptoms. If home care steps don't ease your symptoms, your doctor may prescribe medicine. Possible treatments include:

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
These self-care habits can help you manage dermatitis and feel better:
Take a bleach bath. This may help people with severe atopic dermatitis by decreasing the bacteria on the skin. For a dilute bleach bath, add 1/2 cup (118 milliliters) of household bleach, not concentrated bleach, to a 40-gallon (151-liter) bathtub filled with warm water. Measures are for a U.S. standard-sized tub filled to the overflow drainage holes. Soak from the neck down or just the affected areas for 5 to 10 minutes. Don't put the head under water. Rinse with tap water, then pat dry. Take a bleach bath 2 to 3 times a week.
Many people have had success using a dilute vinegar bath rather than a bleach bath. Add 1 cup (236 milliliters) of vinegar to a bathtub filled with warm water.
Talk with your doctor about whether either of these approaches is a good idea for you.
Many alternative therapies, including those listed below, have helped some people manage their dermatitis.
The evidence for whether these approaches work is mixed. And sometimes herbal and traditional remedies cause irritation or an allergic reaction.
Alternative therapies are sometimes called integrative medicine. If you're considering dietary supplements or other integrative medicine approaches, talk with your doctor about their pros and cons.
You may first bring your concerns to the attention of your primary care provider. Or you may see a doctor who specializes in the diagnosis and treatment of skin conditions (dermatologist) or allergies (allergist).
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Your doctor is likely to ask you a few questions. Being ready to answer them may free up time to go over any points you want to spend more time on. Your doctor might ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.