Mastitis, which mainly affects people who are breastfeeding, causes redness, swelling and pain in one or both breasts. The redness may be harder to see on Black or brown skin.
Mastitis, which mainly affects people who are breastfeeding, causes redness, swelling and pain in one or both breasts. The redness may be harder to see on Black or brown skin.
Mastitis is swelling and redness, called inflammation, of breast tissue. It sometimes involves an infection. Besides causing swelling and redness, mastitis causes breast pain and warmth. An infection also can cause fever and chills.
Mastitis most often affects people who are breastfeeding. This is called lactation mastitis. But mastitis can happen to people who aren't breastfeeding.
Lactation mastitis can cause you to feel run down, making it hard to care for your baby. Sometimes mastitis causes people to wean their babies earlier than they meant to. But continuing to breastfeed is better for you and your baby. This is true even if you're taking an antibiotic.
Symptoms of mastitis can appear suddenly. They may be in one or both breasts. Symptoms may include:
See your healthcare professional if you have breast symptoms that worry you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Milk that is trapped in the breast is the main cause of mastitis. Other causes include:
The structure of the female breast is complex — including fat, glandular and connective tissue, as well as lobes, lobules, ducts, lymph nodes, blood vessels and ligaments.
Each breast has a number of sections (lobules) that branch out from the nipple. Each lobule holds tiny, hollow sacs (alveoli). The lobules are linked by a network of thin tubes (ducts). If you're breast-feeding, ducts carry milk from the alveoli toward the dark area of skin in the center of the breast (areola). From the areola, the ducts join together into larger ducts ending at the nipple.
Spaces around the lobules and ducts are filled with fat, ligaments and connective tissue. The amount of fat in your breasts largely determines their size. The actual milk-producing structures are nearly the same in all women. Female breast tissue is sensitive to cyclic changes in hormone levels. Most women's breast tissue changes as they age, with more fat relative to the amount of dense tissue.
The breast has no muscle tissue. Muscles lie underneath the breasts, however, separating them from your ribs.
Oxygen and nutrients travel to breast tissue through the blood in your arteries and capillaries — thin, fragile blood vessels.
The lymphatic system is a network of lymph nodes and lymph ducts that helps fight infection. Lymph nodes — found under the armpit, above the collarbone, behind the breastbone and in other parts of the body — trap harmful substances that might be in the lymphatic system and safely drain them from the body.
Mastitis that isn't treated or that is due to a blocked duct can cause pus to build up in the breast. This is called an abscess. An abscess most often needs to be drained surgically.
To avoid this complication, talk with your healthcare professional as soon as you get symptoms of mastitis. You may need to take a course of antibiotics.
Before you start breastfeeding, think about meeting with a breastfeeding specialist, called a lactation consultant. This can help you avoid complications such as mastitis.
Lower your chances of getting mastitis by following these tips:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.