There's no single test for rheumatic fever. Diagnosis of rheumatic fever is based on medical history, a physical exam and certain test results.
Blood tests. Blood tests can be done to check for signs of inflammation in the body. These tests include C-reactive protein (CRP) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), also called the sed rate.
Sometimes the actual strep bacteria is no longer be found in the blood or in throat tissues. Another blood test can be done to look for proteins related to the strep bacteria. These proteins are called antibodies.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your rheumatic fever-related health concerns
					Start Here


The goals of treatment for rheumatic fever are to:
Rheumatic fever is treated with medicines, including:
Antibiotics. Penicillin or another antibiotic is usually given to kill the strep bacteria.
After the first antibiotic treatment is fully finished, another round of antibiotics may be given. This stops the rheumatic fever from coming back. A child might need to continue taking antibiotics for 5 years or through age 21 to prevent rheumatic fever from coming back, whichever is longer.
People who had heart inflammation during rheumatic fever might need to continue antibiotics for 10 years or longer.
It's important to have regular health checkups after having rheumatic fever. Heart damage from rheumatic fever might not show up for many years — even decades. Always tell your healthcare provider about any history of rheumatic fever.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
A healthcare provider might recommend bed rest for someone with rheumatic fever. There may be activity restrictions until symptoms improve.
Make an appointment for a health checkup if symptoms of rheumatic fever develop. If there is heart damage, you may be sent to a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for the appointment.
When you make the appointment, ask if any special preparations are needed. For example, you may not be able to eat or drink for a while before some blood tests. Make a list of:
For rheumatic fever, basic questions to ask the care team include:
The healthcare team is likely to ask questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.