Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Is it more effective to floss teeth with a water flosser or with dental floss?
Cleaning between your teeth every day is an important part of keeping your mouth healthy. And there are a variety of tools you can use, depending on your needs. 
Dental floss is an effective tool for cleaning the tight spaces between teeth. It removes the sticky material, called plaque, that can build up in places a toothbrush can't reach. And less plaque means less gum bleeding and a lower risk of gum disease. 
A water flosser is a device that aims a stream of water at the teeth. It's also called an oral irrigator or a dental water jet. A water flosser can help remove pieces of food from between teeth. It also can take plaque off teeth.
If you use dental floss and you don't have gum bleeding or other problems, there's no need to change. Using a water flosser can be helpful for people who have braces, other orthodontics or dental work that makes it hard to use dental floss. A water flosser also may be useful for people who have trouble flossing by hand with dental floss. To lower the risk of contamination with bacteria if you use a water flosser, don't share it with anyone else. 
If plain dental floss gets stuck in your teeth, try waxed floss instead. If you have a hard time handling dental floss, try a floss holder. Other options for cleaning between teeth include interdental brushes, picks or sticks.
To help keep your mouth healthy, clean between your teeth once a day, and brush your teeth twice a day. Get regular dental checkups. If you have questions about flossing and what's right for you, talk with your dentist.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.