Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Allergies and asthma: A Mayo Clinic specialist explains the connection, and what you can do to prevent attacks and manage symptoms.
You may wonder what allergies and asthma have in common besides making you miserable. A lot, as it turns out. Many people who have allergies also have asthma.
The same substances that trigger your hay fever symptoms may cause asthma symptoms. These include pollen, dust mites and pet dander. In some people, skin or food allergies can cause asthma symptoms. This is called allergic asthma.
James T C Li, M.D., Ph.D., a Mayo Clinic allergy specialist, answers questions about the link between allergies and asthma.
An allergic response happens when immune system proteins called antibodies mistakenly identify a harmless substance, such as tree pollen, as an invader. To protect your body from the substance, antibodies bind to the allergen.
The immune system releases chemicals that lead to allergy symptoms. Common symptoms are nasal congestion, runny nose, itchy eyes or skin reactions. For some people, this same reaction also affects the lungs and airways, leading to asthma symptoms.
Most treatments are designed to treat either asthma or hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis. But a few treatments help with both conditions. Some examples:
Allergy shots, also called immunotherapy. Allergy shots can help treat asthma. They gradually reduce your immune system response to certain allergy triggers. This treatment involves getting regular shots. The shots have a tiny amount of the allergens that trigger your symptoms.
Your immune system builds up a tolerance to the allergens over time, and your allergic reactions diminish. In turn, asthma symptoms also decrease.
Anti-immunoglobulin E (IgE) therapy. When you have an allergy, your immune system mistakenly identifies a specific substance as something harmful. Then your body releases antibodies, called IgE, against the culprit allergen.
The next time you come across that allergen, the IgE antibodies sense it. They signal your immune system to release histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream.
A type of medicine called a biologic can help. It affects the action of IgE in the body and helps prevent the allergic reaction that triggers asthma symptoms. Omalizumab (Xolair) is a biologic used to treat allergic asthma. This treatment is used for more severe allergic asthma, but it also might help allergic rhinitis.
You may need other medicines to treat allergies or asthma, especially if your symptoms become worse at times. But recognizing and avoiding the substances that trigger your symptoms is an important step you can take.
A family history of allergies is a major risk factor for allergic asthma. If you have hay fever or other allergies yourself, your risk of getting asthma is higher.
Though allergic asthma is very common, there are other types of asthma with different kinds of triggers. For some people, asthma triggers are exercise, infections, cold air, gastroesophageal reflux disease or stress. Many people have more than one kind of asthma trigger.
Know the things that trigger your allergy and asthma symptoms and learn how to limit your exposure to them. Work with a healthcare professional to find the best treatment to manage your symptoms, and check in with your healthcare team regularly.
Because allergy and asthma symptoms can change over time, you may need to adjust your treatment. Learn the signs that your asthma may be flaring up — and know what to do when it does.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.