A premature baby in the NICU may need to have many tests. Some tests are ongoing. Other exams may be done only if the NICU staff thinks the baby might have a certain health problem.
Tests your premature baby may need include:
Blood tests. Blood samples are taken by pricking the heel or placing a needle in a vein. These tests let the NICU staff closely watch the levels of important substances in your baby's blood, such as calcium and blood sugar. A blood sample also may be checked to look for signs of problems such as anemia or illnesses.
Your baby's health care provider may need the NICU staff to take many blood samples. If so, the staff may insert a thin tube into a vein in the stump of the baby's cut umbilical cord. This way, the staff won't have to stick your baby with a needle each time blood is needed.
More tests may be needed if your baby has other health problems.
The neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) or special care nursery closely tracks your premature baby's health.
This type of care for your baby may include:
Medicines may be given to your baby for different reasons. For instance, some medicines help the lungs and heart work better. Depending on your baby's health, the medicines they receive may include:
Sometimes surgery is needed to treat a premature baby's health problems. Talk with your baby's health care team to understand which complications may lead to surgery. Learn about the types of surgery that might be needed to treat these problems too.
The following signs mean your baby is ready to go home:
The hospital may let a baby go home before meeting one of these requirements. But the baby's medical team and family first need to set up and agree on a plan for home care and follow-up health care.
Your baby's health care team will help you learn how to care for your baby at home. Before your baby can leave the hospital, your baby's nurse or a hospital discharge planner may ask you questions about:

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
The thought of bringing your baby home from the hospital might make you feel relieved, excited and nervous. You can do some things ahead of time to prepare for life at home:
Understand how to care for your baby. Before you leave the hospital, take a course in infant CPR. This can save the lives of babies who stop breathing. Ask your baby's medical team any questions you might have, and take notes.
Make sure you're comfortable caring for your baby. This is very important if you'll need to use health monitors or give your infant medicines, oxygen or other treatments. Ask what symptoms to call your baby's health care provider about, such as breathing or feeding problems.
Protect your baby from RSV. Premature babies have a higher risk of getting a serious illness called RSV infection. This disease is caused by a virus. It affects the lungs and other organs involved in breathing.
There are a few options to protect premature babies from severe RSV infection. One is an RSV vaccine for pregnant people that helps protect babies from birth through 6 months of age. The other is an antibody product given to the infant. This product is called nirsevimab (Beyfortus). Rarely, when nirsevimab is not available or a child is not eligible for it, another antibody product called palivizumab may be given. 
Get your baby vaccinated. Vaccines help protect people from dangerous diseases. It's suggested that vaccines be given to premature babies who are in stable health based on their age. Your baby's care team may talk to you about a schedule for when your baby should receive each vaccine. Delays in this schedule are common. Work with your baby's care provider to make sure your baby gets every vaccine on the schedule.
Also make sure that other family members in your home are up to date on their vaccines, including shots for the flu and COVID-19. Family members and adult caregivers also should check with their health care providers to find out if they're up to date on their pertussis vaccine for whooping cough. If you're pregnant, make sure you're up to date on this vaccine too.
Caring for a premature baby can be very tiring. You may be anxious about your baby's health. You also might feel angry, guilty or overwhelmed.
Some of these tips may help during this hard time:
Caring for a premature baby is a great challenge. Take it one day at a time. Despite the worries and setbacks, celebrate your preemie's strength and ability to adapt. Cherish the time you can spend getting to know your child.
As the parent of a premature baby in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), you'll talk with many care providers for your baby. Members of the NICU team caring for your infant may include:
You also might meet with a pediatric social worker. This professional can help you find services that might be useful during and after your baby's hospital stay.
Ideally, you'll work together with your baby's care providers. Over time, they can show you how to hold, feed and care for your baby.
It's OK to ask the NICU care team any questions you have about your baby's condition. Or you can write down your questions and get answers when you're ready.
You also can ask how to help care for your baby:
You may have questions about taking your baby home too:
During your baby's time in the NICU, feel free to ask the staff how you can become more involved in your baby's care. It can give you confidence as a new parent. It also can make life easier once you bring your child home.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.