Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Home / RSV / RSV and older adults: Who’s at risk?
RSV is often mistaken for a cold. But for some, the virus can be life-threatening. Learn who's at risk of serious RSV — and how to protect yourself.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
For most healthy adults, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) might mean a few days on the couch watching reruns. The virus’s cold-like symptoms — a runny nose, cough and sore throat — can feel crummy. But they aren’t typically serious enough to call the doctor.
However, that’s not the case for everyone. For some adults, RSV is like a bad flu. For others, it’s a life-threatening virus.
RSV can cause pneumonia or other serious lung infections. It also can make some chronic health conditions worse. In the U.S., it’s estimated that up to 10,000 older adults with RSV die of the virus each year.
Is RSV a potential threat for you or your loved ones? Here’s what experts say.
You have a higher risk of a serious case of RSV if you:
If you or a loved one is at a high risk of serious RSV, there are simple ways to protect yourself and others from infection. Mayo Clinic experts recommend the following tips:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
The Mayo Clinic Diet: Weight-Loss Medications Edition
This new edition of The Mayo Clinic Diet combines the practical, no-nonsense approach of the time-tested Mayo Clinic eating plan with brand-new information on the safe and effective use of prescription weight-loss medications. Designed to support people who are using prescription medications to lose weight and who want to make lasting lifestyle…
Discover more RSV content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Derek J. Lomas, M.D., Paras H. Shah, M.D.

      Dr. Takahashi specializes in geriatric care in the Division of Community Internal Medicine at Mayo Clinic in Rochester and is advancing the care of older adults through investigation of new delivery models of care.

    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.
Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.