Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Mayo Clinic Guide to Your Baby's First Years, 3rd Edition
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Parenting, Kids & Teens / How do kids grow?
Growth underscores pretty much all of childhood. There’s the fun side: watching kids get bigger, growing into new things and out of old ones. But then there’s the more complicated side: worrying kids are growing too fast or too slow compared to other kids their age.
On this episode of Mayo Clinic Kids, Dr. Siobhan Pittock is here to talk to us about growing up—literally.
Dr. Angela Mattke: This is “Kids Health Matters,” a podcast from Mayo Clinic where we discuss the latest pediatric research and recommendations to help keep your kids laughing and thriving. I’m Dr. Angela Mattke, a pediatrician with Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. On this episode: “How Do Kids Grow?”
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Growing a child is like growing a plant — just add water! Except… There are a few more steps involved. But much like plants, kids can also be early bloomers, or late bloomers. And some of those kids might end up visiting an endocrinologist like Dr. Siobhan Pittock. I’ll be really honest, the early bloomers, if they’re just a little bit early, they never come to see me. It’s the late bloomers who are bothered.
That’s very satisfying in some ways to take care of because you can reassure families that this is not a disease. Don’t worry. Everything is great. But in some ways it’s dissatisfying because it’s still hard if you’re a 14-year-old boy and you look like an 11-year-old and all of your friends are shaving, and they have deep voices and are a foot taller than you.
Dr. Angela Mattke: It’s hard to just tell somebody, ”Just a tincture of time, you will get there.”
Dr. Angela Mattke: Growth underscores pretty much all of childhood. Sometimes it happens so slowly, it’s easy to forget it’s happening at all. And then it seems like your kid has gained three inches overnight!
There’s the fun side: watching kids get bigger, marking their height against the doorframe, growing into new clothes and out of old ones. But then there’s the more complicated side: what if your kid’s growing faster or slower than other kids their age? Because it’s not just about physical health — your kid’s growth can also affect how their peers treat them, and their self-esteem.
This episode is all about growing up — literally. How do you know if your kid is the right height and weight for their age? Are they growing fast enough? Are they growing too fast? And do we even have any control over the process?
To help us unpack these questions, we’re joined today by Dr. Siobhan Pittock. Siobhan is a pediatric endocrinologist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. Thank you so much for joining me today, Siobhan. It’s great to have you and I’m really excited to talk about growth.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: I love talking about growth. So delighted to be here.
Dr. Angela Mattke: We’ll talk all day. We’ll talk everyone’s ears off. Well, let’s move in and talk about the basics about growth. What do kids need to grow?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: People tend to think immediately of hormones, but really children need nutrition. They need to be safe, they need to be healthy. Worldwide the most common cause for short stature is undernutrition, malnutrition. Not a super common thing that we see in the U. S., but we do see it. If I see a child who’s undernourished and they’re not growing, we have to fix the nutrition first. And then we go from there.
Major stress can actually look just like growth hormone deficiency. Neglect, severe trauma for a child. They may not grow. Again, luckily, not super common, and obviously they need their hormones to work. Thyroid hormone is really important for growth. Growth hormones are really important for growth.
Children who have serious medical conditions, very uncontrolled Inflammatory Bowel Disease or asthma, or if they’re on medications, sometimes for common diseases. High dose steroids that are taken a lot for asthma can interfere. If children have major stress, like they’re going through chemotherapy for cancer, they’ll have a period that they won’t grow too well. A child not growing at all is always a concern.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Kids need food. They need nutrition. They need sleep. They need exercise. They need safety. They need to not be in a toxic, stressful environment, right? Once the body’s getting all of those things, what is the part that’s actually starting to tell the body to start growing or to stop growing when they’re done with their growth spurt?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: There are so many hormones involved in growth. The main drivers of growth would be thyroid hormone and growth hormone from a hormone standpoint. The stopping growth is fascinating. What stops us growing is actually when our growth plates close.
You’ve heard that children have more bones than adults. They don’t actually have more bones, but on an X ray, it looks like they have more bones, and that’s because while the radius, for instance, that big forearm bone, if you take an X ray of my radius, it’s one bone. If you take a picture of a child’s radius, it looks like one long bone, but then at the wrist, there’s this little extra bone.
It’s actually all the one, but there’s this soft cartilage growth plate part that doesn’t show up white on an x-ray. Those are growth plates. While you have growth plates that are open, you can grow. You should grow if everything else that we talked about is working well. But when those growth plates are closed, you will not grow taller.
What closes those growth plates? Puberty. Really interesting actually. People generally recognize that testosterone is the male sex hormone. Estrogen is the female sex hormone. It’s actually estrogen in boys and girls that closes the growth plates.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Are you serious? I feel like I never knew that.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: You learn something new every time you talk to me.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: A tiny bit of testosterone in boys gets converted to estrogen and then it’s the estrogen that closes their growth plates. Before puberty, children are growing and then those sex hormones kick in and then as they increase and time passes, those growth plates close and that’s what stops us growing.
Dr. Angela Mattke: We’ve talked about habits—mostly things that we can control, like eating and nutrition without extenuating circumstances. But what about those things that we really can’t control? What about genetics? How does that affect how kids grow?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Genetics plays a huge part. And you see it, there are tall families, There are shorter families. You’ll occasionally see a five foot mother have a 10 pound baby. It is incredibly unlikely that that 10 pound baby is going to be a six foot four adult because their mother is five feet tall. Both genetic parents contribute to height.
In fact, there’s a really nice way to calculate out to give us an estimate. It’s not perfect because if it was perfect all biologic sisters would be the exact same height. All biologic brothers would be the exact same height, and it’s not that. But generally, sisters with the same parents are around about the same height.
Dr. Angela Mattke: That did not work out for me. No.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Generally, we calculate this number called the midparental height. What we do is if this is a biological girl, we say, okay, your parents were a man and a woman, and we convert. We say your father was X height. If he were a woman, that’s equivalent to five inches less, because on average men are five inches taller than women. And then we’ve got two equivalent female heights, and then we average it. That’s how we calculate the midparental height.
Most children, when they grow up, about 80 percent or so, will end up within two inches of that mid parental height. When people say, “How will I know what height I’ll be? Isn’t it something about when you’re two years old or when you’re three years old, or when you’re five years old? Can’t you calculate that?”
Actually, a better estimate of how tall you’re going to be is just looking at the parents’ heights. But it’s 80%. It is not a hundred percent. And we all know, you’re telling me you were an outlier in your house. We all know that there are people who don’t fall within similar heights to siblings or close to the midparental height, even people without any disease. There’s a lot more complicated genetics too. And certainly There are genes that predispose people and variants in certain genes can affect height. And you might pick up that gene from one parent and the other siblings didn’t pick it up.
Broadly speaking, mid parental height is a really good way. And tall parents tend to have tall children. Shorter parents tend to have shorter children, if all is well.
Dr. Angela Mattke: I’m 5’3. My husband’s 6’4, my kids will probably be average height, right? If we’re thinking about it, I’m a little bit shorter than average, my husband’s taller than average.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Absolutely. They’re probably in the middle.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Exactly. There’s this idea out there that you can predict a child’s future height at two years old just by doubling it. Is that actually true?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: It depends on how accurate you think is reasonable. I would think it’s not super accurate to just double. It will give you a ballpark, maybe within four inches, but four inches is a big difference in terms of an adult height. When I’m asked, “What height will my baby be?” I tend to lean towards what height are the parents?
Dr. Angela Mattke: You know why it also feels less accurate? It’s really hard to get an accurate height measurement on a two-year-old.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: I was going to say that “Well, if you can even measure them.”
Dr. Angela Mattke: It’s hard. Those are transitions for kids.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: That’s actually a not infrequent reason, believe it or not, that I get to see two-year-olds in the clinic because they just haven’t been measured accurately. The other really interesting thing before the age of two, you may have noticed we always measure children lying down. And if you’re lying down, you should be put on a chart for a lying down measurement.
People say, “Well, why are you being so fussy?” Well, when you stand up, you’re actually shorter than when you’re lying down. Because all of those vertebrae, all of your backbones kind of plonk, plonk, plonk, plonk, plonk, sit down on each other like a sandwich and they squish the sandwich, the discs between the vertebrae.
Actually between two and three, there are charts that you can measure a height. Then you should be measuring a height and putting them on a height chart, or you can choose if you like to measure them lying down.
That’s a common reason that, believe it or not, I’ll see children in the clinic because it looks like, gosh, they haven’t grown a lot. Then it’s the most magical thing. I say, let’s measure them lying down, and guess what? They’ve grown beautifully.
I can’t tell you how many times in my office, as I see a kid all of a sudden who’s not growing well. I march them out there myself, I measure him myself, and it’s hard sometimes. If your kid is fussing about making them do something, but sometimes when the doctor is like, “This is actually true, I probably have to do a blood draw, and I need to do an x-ray,” getting them to cooperate is just a little bit more important than those situations.
I find myself just asking permission from parents, like, “I know they’re not going to like this, but we really need to do it. We need somebody to hold that head, hold it really firmly against that surface, And I’m going to stretch them out and they might scream, but it’ll only take us a few seconds if we get it right. It’s so important because you’re right. If it looks like they’re not growing, they can end up having major evaluations, totally unnecessary blood draws and stress and worry for the family just because we couldn’t take that discomfort.
Dr. Angela Mattke: It’s three seconds of discomfort versus blood draws and all those other things and appointments. It’s important for parents to understand why we want to do that sometimes.
Dr. Angela Mattke: For most kids to grow well, the recipe is simple: nutrition, sleep, exercise, and a safe, non-stressful environment. If your kid is generally healthy, then their growth hormone, thyroid hormone, and a few other hormones will do their jobs.
Your kid will continue to grow until their growth plates close during puberty. It’s hard to predict exactly how tall your kid will end up, but calculating the midparental height is usually the best bet.
To do that, you convert their biological parents’ heights to the same biological sex as your kid, so either two male heights or two female heights, then take the average. If your kid fusses or screams when you or your doctor tries to measure them, that’s okay! We don’t want to cause any more discomfort than we have to, but it’s important to get that measurement right so we don’t have to do more serious evaluations down the line. It makes a difference if your kid is standing up or lying down, so make sure you’re using the right growth chart.
Obviously, we want to make sure kids are growing, full stop. But we also want to know how they’re growing. Let’s talk more about signs of healthy growth, or signs that something might need a closer look. I love my growth charts. I feel like I’m kind of an endocrinologist, but I’m a pediatrician because I also live and die by my growth charts.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Growth charts are amazing.
Dr. Angela Mattke: They are and kids grow in predictable patterns. That gets to talking a little bit more about what those predictable patterns are and what that growth looks like in kids. Because it should be very predictable. What kind of things do we measure in a doctor’s office to keep track of growth?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: We measure length. Now you all know length is different from height. We measure length, weight, and in infants, actually, we also measure the head circumference, that measuring tape around the head. Which is really important because there are neurologic issues predominantly that can really affect head growth in infants.
We typically don’t measure the head frequently unless there’s a specific concern after the age of three. Then, depending on whether you’re going to switch to that standing chart at the age of two or at the age of three they’ll be measured standing up and always checking the weight. We should check the length very frequently in that first year or two of life. Then you’ll notice when children are older, we actually measure less commonly. That’s not just because we don’t bother, but because children grow more slowly when they’re a bit older. There’s no point in measuring them three months later.
How often we measure is because of how fast kids are growing. How fast is that usually? In infancy, children grow super fast. The fastest anyone will ever grow is in their first year of life. Children grow 10 inches in that first year. I always tell my families when we’re talking about growth, it’s the only time, maybe outside of pregnancy, where you have to change clothes size every three months.
If you think about clothing sizes, it kind of matches the speed of growth. You got zero to three months, three to six, 12 and then often 12 to 18, so it’s still pretty fast growth. Then there’s Eighteen to two years and you switch into 2T, 3T, 4T, 5T. Then oftentimes six to eight, eight to 10, and 10 to 12.
Children grow super fast during the first year, and then between one and three, it’s starting to kind of slow down to four-ish inches a year, and then really from about the age of three until they hit puberty, children grow at a pretty steady rate, two inches, give or take some a little faster, some a little slower, and then children speed up again during puberty. It’s really very steady.
I’m a parent too, and I am totally a victim to this as well. We all think, “Oh my gosh, he hasn’t grown in ages. Whoa, he had a growth spurt.” But if you actually measure children, they grow very, very steadily. And then yes, absolutely during puberty they’ll have a period when they’re growing quickly, but they don’t stop, stagger and jump up. It’s not like a step. It’s very much a hill, not a stop and start.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Absolutely. What’s happening in the body during those growth spurts where they’re going through like faster rates of growth? And what’s triggering the body to all of a sudden take off and grow at seven to nine centimeters a year?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: That’s during puberty. During puberty, it’s a combination. The sex hormones themselves promote growth and also the amount of growth hormone that the body produces increases in response to the sex hormones. It’s Interesting when we’re measuring growth hormone levels in children they increase slightly with age and then they increase a huge amount, depending on the stage of puberty a child is at because you secrete more growth hormone and you secrete growth hormone pulses.
Growth hormone is secreted by the pituitary, which is a gland in the brain and that gland just gives squirts of growth hormone every so often, and it gives bigger squirts more frequently during puberty. Again, the same time as they’re doing that, they’re also maturing those growth plates at a faster rate. And ultimately, at the end of puberty, growth plates will be closed.
Dr. Angela Mattke: You mentioned that what’s really concerning is when kids don’t grow. How can parents know if their kids are at a proper weight and height and growth pattern?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Growth charts. Growth charts really are an incredible resource. The growth charts that we use in the U.S. are based on the U.S. population. The U.S. population, I always tell my patients, is made up of a mix. My Irish children, though they’re American, I think of them as Irish. The African-American children, Chinese children, Mexican children, Hispanic children, all sorts, are the mix that makes up this country.  It’s that mix of children that went into making these growth charts. We use the CDC growth charts typically, although in the first two years of life, we tend to use ones created by the World Health Organization.
It’s really important when you bring your child for their well child visit that you just take a peek at the growth chart. People don’t have to stay on exactly the same line, but they should be in the same part of the growth chart.
Zigzags don’t happen in height, so children don’t shrink and grow. If it looks like your child has shrunk on a growth chart, just let’s try and get an accurate measurement.
Dr. Angela Mattke: If a kid doesn’t seem to be growing the way you’d expect, what’s your thought process? What are you looking for, or trying to rule out?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: The first thing I will look at is, “Well, where are they on the growth chart?” The second thing I will look at is, have they been growing? Is this a child who is low on the growth chart, but has always been low on the growth chart and is growing. That’s far less concerning to me. Or is this a child who isn’t growing?
A child who is not growing, I think I said it earlier, is always a concern. Obviously after puberty, they’re allowed not to grow. But before that, it’s always a concern. Like I said, worldwide, the biggest reason for that is malnutrition. Not a huge issue in the U.S., but we see children with malnutrition because of eating disorders.
We also need to take a really good history. If a child is overall well, they will grow. If a child has a serious medical illness, sometimes the first time it shows up is that they’re not growing, whether that’s kidney disease, liver disease, celiac disease. There are totally non-hormone related things.
We ask about belly symptoms. We ask about urine symptoms. We ask about any symptoms that could represent liver disease. And then, if all of those things are good, we’ll ask more direct questions that could make us think about a specific hormone issue. And there are three hormone issues that cause children not to grow.
Lack of thyroid hormone. We tend to think of thyroid hormone as only being important for grownups or people being miserable and tired and gaining weight with lack of thyroid hormone. But actually in children, lack of growth is the biggest thing that we see when they don’t have enough thyroid hormone.
Lack of growth hormone, and it makes sense—it’s in the name. If children don’t develop growth hormones, they will grow very poorly. And then the third one is a much more rare one. It’s if they’re body has, for whatever reason, too much cortisol or stress hormone.
Cortisol is a steroid, so whether you have too much of it because you have a rare disease where you’re making too much, That’s called cushing’s, or you have too much of it because you have some very serious medical condition that you’re needing to receive a lot of steroids, that can really interfere with your growth as well, and it has the same effect. Beyond that, there are many, many other conditions. In the big picture of all of the children I see for short stature, it would be a tiny minority who end up having a genetic diagnosis, a genetic syndrome.
Dr. Angela Mattke: You talked a little bit about those kids that are late bloomers. How do you tell the difference between a child that is potentially going to be a late bloomer versus something that is maybe more concerning and needs evaluation?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Late bloomer is a diagnosis of exclusion. We check for the other things. We will want to know do they have any symptoms of any other concerning underlying disease? And if there are no red flags and their puberty is late and often there’s a family history.
The late bloomer grows normally throughout childhood, but oftentimes they are smaller than you expect them to be for their family. The typical pattern of a late bloomer is that sometime during the first two years of life, they drop to a lower line on the chart than you’d expect for their family. Their parents may have concerns and ask why it is that she’s on the 10th percentile?
Everyone else is in the 75th percentile. But they’ll typically grow normally. And then when their friends are going through puberty, friends are all speeding up. Then his child is asking what’s wrong? “Everybody else is having a growth spurt and I’m not.”
In terms of telling the difference between that and something more sinister, obviously, if the pattern fits, we think, Ooh, this is kind of fitting the pattern. Is there a family history? We always ask when a mother had her first period. We’ll always ask when did father have his growth spurt? Men, it’s not as obvious.
Oftentimes we’ll ask, “Did you grow after high school?” If a man grew after high school, for sure he was a late bloomer. Oftentimes these late bloomers have a family history of late blooming. They don’t have to. But if there’s a family history of that, it’s reasonable to say it fits the pattern and we don’t need to do anything at all.
One test though that is very frequently done that is incredibly helpful is to check how old the bones look. You will grow until your growth plates close. If your growth plates seem like they are younger than your age, that’s telling all of us that you are going to grow for longer.
If you’re 12-years-old and your bones think you’re 10, it means that you have the growth left to do as a 10-year-old. Not the growth left to do of a 12-year-old. A 12-year-old is typically sixth grade. If I see a smaller 12-year-old who has delayed puberty, I’ll say, ”Okay, you’re in sixth grade, your bones, no other part of your body, but just your bones, not your brain, not your maturity, nothing else, your bones think you’re in fourth grade.”
If you went into the fourth grade class, look around. You’re really average height for the fourth graders. And so don’t worry. That’s what we anticipate you’re going to do. You’re just going to kind of grow along with the fourth graders. Bone age is incredibly helpful for telling us about those late bloomers. The bone age will seem younger than the actual age.
If there’s one big takeaway here, it’s growth charts! They’re what doctors use to track growth, and you can keep tabs on your kid’s growth chart as well. Kids grow the most during their first year. After 2 years, their growth rate usually steadies at about two inches a year until puberty. An easy way to remember this is to think of different clothing sizes and the ages associated with them.
And contrary to popular belief, growth isn’t all spurts and stops — most growth happens at a pretty steady rate. If your kid’s not growing, or growing more slowly than expected, step one is to work with your doctor to make sure their measurement is accurate. If it’s correct, we’ll start to look for signs of poor nutrition like an eating disorder, any underlying diseases it could be a symptom of, or any potential issues with hormones.
And if your kid’s a late bloomer, it’s generally not a cause for concern. We’ll make sure there aren’t other issues at play, but if there’s a family history of late blooming and your kid’s growth is otherwise following a pattern, they’re likely doing just fine. We know how kids grow, and what we look for in the doctor’s office. Let’s talk a bit about what we’re doing at home.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Obviously as doctors, we are measuring kids at their annual checkups. But for parents that want to keep an eye on things, do you recommend that they keep track of their kids’ growth at home and if they decide to do so, cause it’s fun to measure on the wall? Any tips on how to do it accurately?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Oh, I don’t know. Yes and no. Measuring children super often can actually be difficult. Even for me, a growth doctor, even if I’m really concerned about a child’s growth, I will say my bare minimum gap between measurements, is four months, typically six months and it’s just because the amount of error even though we have specialized equipment and we are super fussy and we do it ourselves, you can be off by a little bit and then it can cause a lot of concern.
Whereas obviously if you leave a wider gap between measurements, well then, if you’re a few millimeters off, it’s still going to look okay. Having said that, of course, there’s no problem if you want to measure at home. It is difficult. But I can tell you what I do with my boys at home when they say measure me and see how tall they are. I stand them up barefoot against the flat part of the door frame. And I use one of those metal, retractable measuring tapes because that kind of stays stiff. There’s always a hook at the bottom of it, and I’ll put that at the bottom and then I’ll put that up on the wall behind them and then I’ll just stand them up against it.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: And do it that way. It’s hard to do it and children will kind of move their heads around and their necks should be stretched out, but when you, at home, try to stretch them out, they’ll go on their tippy toes. Just do your best. I think once a year, children absolutely should be measured.
When they’re younger, like I said, children are growing so fast that it is reasonable to measure them more often. But yeah, don’t stress too much. If you see something on the measurement at home that makes you concerned, just bring them in and have them measured properly. And many places you can just do a quick nurse visit and do a measurement and someone will review it for you.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Yeah, absolutely. This is kind of more of a societal, cultural question, but do you think that our culture and society has realistic attitudes about height and weight in kids?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: Oh, don’t get me started.
Dr. Angela Mattke: I do want to get you started. Please.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: It is really hard. I think I told you about the teenage boy who is not as tall as his friends because his puberty is later. It’s really, really hard. Of course, it shouldn’t be hard, but it is hard. And unfortunately, body image. There are certain expectations that girls look a particular way, that boys look a particular way. And children don’t always go through puberty changes at the same time as their friends. And unfortunately, we can see a lot of distress.
Unfortunately, taller is deemed as a more favorable attribute. I know you’re an eating disorder specialist, Angie, so you see there’s this striving for thinness. There’s also this striving that goes on for height, for being tall. That’s often unrealistic. I don’t know how to fix it.
Dr. Angela Mattke: That probably comes to your office. People come in and say, “What can we do to make our kid grow taller?” What do you tell them in those situations?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: We talk about a lot of the things we’ve talked about here. What is growth? What is normal growth? Absolutely the last thing I want to do is miss abnormal growth and miss an underlying problem. We talk about genetic predicted potential, we talk about what’s a realistic expectation for your family if this is your height. This is my biological mom’s height. This is the biological dad’s height.
We talk about just normal, healthy things, what you can do. Good sleep, healthy diet, maintaining a normal weight. Those are all things that will optimize what your child is able to do, and then try to set some realistic expectations. I don’t know. Should I even say this? Most children, if you give them growth hormone, will grow taller.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: That does not mean every child should get growth hormone. Believe me, I’m a big user of growth hormone when it’s appropriate. And there are plenty of conditions where it’s appropriate and it’s wonderful to have a treatment that works. But we shouldn’t be giving people growth hormone just because we can and just because they want to be taller if they’re going to be a normal height.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Just to follow up on that, what are some of those conditions where you would actually give growth hormone?
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: There’s certain FDA approved indications, not surprisingly growth hormone deficiency. There are certain genetic conditions Prader Willi syndrome, Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome, these are all syndromes that are associated with very significant short stature where growth hormone has been shown to help.
I’m not going through an exhaustive list here, but just to give you a sense. Children who have kidney failure grow very, very poorly. We know that they respond well to growth hormones. Probably the most controversial of FDA approved is idiopathic short stature.
Idiopathic short stature is a catch all term. It‘s because doctors don’t like to sound foolish, but it is short stature when I have no clue why. We have exhausted all of the tests that we know, and so we say, “Oh, I don’t know, you’re short, and I don’t know why.”
What is idiopathic short stature? Like how small? This is where a lot of the interest in growth hormones has grown. And we know that not all, but many, many children with idiopathic short stature will grow taller with growth hormone. We’re allowed to give it FDA-wise, if you are destined to be under five-feet-three as a boy, as an adult or four-foot-11 as a girl. Those cutoffs have been considered if you’re going to be shorter than that, that’s reasonable to give growth hormone. There are many folks who want growth hormone, even though they’re destined to be much taller than that.
Dr. Angela Mattke: Well, thank you so much for joining us today. It was fabulous to learn more about growth and that estrogen is involved in the growth plates with sex-assigned male at birth. That’s very interesting.
Dr. Siobhan Pittock: I’m delighted that I was able to add something to your growth knowledge as a pediatrician, Angie.
Dr. Angela Mattke: I don’t know how I didn’t know that, but maybe I did and I forgot it. But, thanks again. If you want to keep an eye on your kid’s  growth, you can measure them at home. It’s best to wait four to six months between measurements at a minimum, and to measure about once a year. That way, your kid grows enough between measurements that it’s easy to see the difference.
It’s hard to get a precise measurement at home, so if you’re ever unsure, you can take your kid in for a nurse visit to get measured. And as we know, almost everyone wants to be taller and thinner. But remember, health and happiness can come in all shapes and sizes. The best we can do is take good care of our kids so they grow to their maximum potential: make sure they get plenty of sleep, eat a nutritious diet, and have healthy, realistic expectations.
That’s all for this episode. But if your kid has something else going on, or you have a topic suggestion, send us an email at mcppodcasts@mayo.edu or leave us a voicemail at 507-538-6272, and we’ll see if we can help you out. Thanks for listening!
Medical Artificial Intelligence Breakthroughs
From machine learning to virtual surgery practice, this exploration of scientific inquiry celebrates the greatest developments to date in medical artificial intelligence. Get to know the physicians, scientists, and other researchers responsible for these breakthroughs in medicine, and explore the ups, the downs, and the eureka moments that are science…
Discover more Parenting, Kids & Teens content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
Want more children’s health and parenting information? Sign up for free to our email list.
Children’s health information and parenting tips to your inbox.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing.

      Dr. Mattke is the medical editor of Mayo Clinic Guide to Raising a Healthy Child and  a pediatrician in the Division of Community Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine at Mayo Clinic Children’s Center in Rochester, Minnesota.
    

      Siobhan T. Pittock, M.B., B.Ch.
    

      Dr. Pittock is a pediatric endocrinologist at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. 
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.