Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Pregnancy / How will my body change after pregnancy?
In this recurring guest column, Kate White, M.D., of Boston Medical Center, answers your questions on all things gynecology. As the author of the Mayo Clinic Press book Your Sexual Health, she’s ready to dole out wisdom on sex, periods, menopause and more. Submit a question here.
Q: I’m pregnant for the first time and am already struggling with some of the changes to my body. What can I expect after labor? What are the chances my body will go back to “normal”?
A: Let’s face it — your body will change after you have a baby. When you’ve just grown and birthed a whole human, there’s no other way around it — that’s going to lead to some changes.
While there’s a lot of information about what to expect with certain aspects pregnancy and childbirth, you may be less prepared for the other changes. You might get stretch marks over your breasts, belly, hips and thighs. Your belly may have a gap between your abs (diastasis recti), and a lower belly pooch. Vaginal dryness is common, due to a drop in hormone levels. And hemorrhoids (swollen veins in and around the anus) may make anal sex painful. Even your feet may change, becoming larger, and your mood may be all over the place for a few months. Sad truth—you can’t avoid post-pregnancy changes in your breasts by not breastfeeding. It’s the change in the weight of your breasts that makes them saggy.
Many pregnant people dread the thought of what giving birth will do to their vagina. They’ve heard horror stories about leaking urine (incontinence) and worse, the bulging of the walls of the vagina out the opening (prolapse). Some people worry so much about delivery that they request a cesarean section, thinking that it will protect their vagina from harm. But when it comes to your post-delivery vaginal health, it’s not just the delivery that influences how quickly your body heals. Carrying the weight of the baby in your body for nine months, with the baby’s head bearing down, creates the risk of loosening of your pelvic floor muscles, no matter how the baby is born.
Certainly, a C-section avoids additional trauma to your vagina, but it too has consequences. A post-C-section scarred uterus is never as strong as one without a scar, and you’ll have risks of placenta problems in future pregnancies, along with scar tissue formation in your pelvis outside the uterus. If your labor lets you deliver vaginally, it truly is the safest way to go for your body.
But the good news is that not all these changes to your body after birth are permanent. Vaginal dryness will likely resolve after you stop breastfeeding. Diastasis recti can be addressed with certain exercises or physical therapy. Your mood should stabilize after a few months or with the help of medication.
When it comes to permanent body changes, try to see them in a positive way: They’re evidence that your body did an amazing thing, a body that continues to protect and care for the baby you had. These changes are a sign of strength, and you should be proud of what you—and your body—have accomplished.
The content on this site is to educate consumers on health care and medical issues. Nothing about the content on this site should be considered, or used as a substitute for, medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. This site and its services do not constitute the practice of any medical or other professional health care advice, diagnosis or treatment.
The Mayo Clinic Diet Journal, Third Edition
This handy companion to The Mayo Clinic Diet is not your typical journal. The 224 pages of The Mayo Clinic Diet Journal will help you plan, track and review your progress over 10 weeks as you follow the program described in the #1 New York Times bestseller, The Mayo Clinic Diet.
Discover more Pregnancy content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Francis A. Farraye, M.D., M.Sc., Sunanda V. Kane, M.D., M.S.P.H.

      Dr. White, author of Your Guide to Miscarriage & Pregnancy Loss and Your Sexual Health, is an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Boston University School of Medicine and the vice chair of academics in the OB-GYN department at Boston Medical Center. She is a fellow of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, a fellow of the Society of Family Planning, and a member of the American Public Health Association. As a board-certified OB-GYN, mother and pregnancy loss survivor, Dr. Kate has been caring for women for more than 20 years, helping them navigate every stage leading up to menopause, including periods, childbirth and pregnancy loss. She also conducts research in contraception, has been continuously grant funded for 15 years, and frequently lectures regionally and nationally on topics related to women’s reproductive health. Dr. Kate lives outside of Boston with her husband and their three children.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Andy Abril, M.D., Barbara K. Bruce, Ph.D., L.P.
by Nathan K. LeBrasseur, Ph.D., Christina Chen, M.D.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.