The throat includes the esophagus, trachea, larynx, tonsils and epiglottis.
The throat includes the esophagus, trachea, larynx, tonsils and epiglottis.
Laryngotracheal (luh-ring-go-TRAY-key-ul) reconstruction surgery widens the windpipe or voice box to make breathing easier. The windpipe also is called the trachea and the voice box also is called the larynx. Laryngotracheal reconstruction involves placing a small piece of cartilage into the narrowed section of the windpipe to make it wider and stay open. Cartilage is stiff connective tissue found in many areas of the body.
A narrowed windpipe is most common in children, but it can happen in adults.
The goal of laryngotracheal reconstruction is to provide a safe and stable airway without needing a breathing tube.
The primary goal of laryngotracheal reconstruction surgery is to create a permanent, stable airway for breathing without the use of a breathing tube. Surgery also can help with voice and swallowing issues.
In people who already have a tracheostomy tube to help them breathe, this procedure often makes it possible to get rid of the tracheostomy. A tracheostomy is a hole that a surgeon makes through the front of the neck and into the trachea. A tracheostomy tube is placed into the hole to keep it open for breathing.
In children, a narrowed windpipe may happen from injury or infection. It also may be a condition found at birth or a condition that results from having a breathing tube.
An adult's windpipe can become narrowed for the same reasons. Also in adults, a narrowed windpipe can happen from diseases that cause blood vessel or tissue irritation and swelling. Examples of these diseases are sarcoidosis or granulomatosis with polyangiitis, previously called Wegener granulomatosis.
Laryngotracheal reconstruction is a surgery that carries some risks, including:
Carefully follow your healthcare team's directions about how to prepare for surgery.
If your child is having surgery, favorite items from home such as a stuffed animal, blanket or photos put up in the hospital room may help comfort your child. This can help smooth the recovery.
Your healthcare team lets you know what time you or your child need to stop eating and drinking in the hours before surgery. Having food or drink before surgery could lead to complications during surgery, such as breathing food and liquid into the lungs. If you or your child eats or drinks after the requested cutoff time, surgery may have to be rescheduled.
Laryngotracheal reconstruction surgery may be done using several different techniques:
Endoscopy and open-airway surgery may be done in one surgery, called a single-stage procedure, or in more than one surgery, known as a double-stage procedure.
Based on your or your child's condition and any other medical issues, the surgeon will talk with you about the best surgical plan.
Several tests and exams are often needed before laryngotracheal reconstruction surgery. The goal of each test or exam is to help evaluate medical conditions that may cause problems with the airway or affect the surgical plan. The tests and exams also help to prepare for follow-up care that's needed.
One or more of the following surgeries may be needed before laryngotracheal reconstruction:
Tonsils are fleshy pads located at each side of the back of the throat.
Tonsils are fleshy pads located at each side of the back of the throat.
Open-airway laryngotracheal reconstruction
Open-airway laryngotracheal reconstruction can be done in single or double stages, using different techniques. Placing cartilage grafts as part of the surgery is called a laryngotracheoplasty. The exact surgery depends on your or your child's condition.
Many people who have laryngotracheal reconstruction surgery already have a tracheostomy. This is a surgically placed tube that goes from the outside of the neck directly into the trachea to help with breathing.
A surgical option called a hybrid, or one-and-a-half-stage reconstruction, combines parts of both single-stage and double-stage reconstruction. With this technique, a single long stent is placed inside the trachea to support it. A smaller stent or tube is placed through an opening in the trachea to provide a safe airway for breathing during and after the surgery.
Sometimes, the surgeon removes the narrow part of the windpipe completely. Then the surgeon sews the remaining ends of the trachea together.
Another surgical option is reshaping the narrow part of the trachea to make it wider. This is called a slide tracheoplasty.
Endoscopic laryngotracheal reconstruction
Endoscopic laryngotracheal reconstruction is a less invasive procedure. During endoscopic surgery, the surgeon puts a stiff viewing tube called a laryngoscope into the mouth. Surgical tools and a rod fitted with a light and camera are passed through the tube and into the airway to do the surgery. The surgery can be done without making any cuts in the skin or making only small cuts.
In some cases, the surgeon may use this method to place the cartilage grafts for laryngotracheoplasty. In some cases, the surgeon may be able to use lasers, balloons or other methods to open the narrowing without needing to do a laryngotracheoplasty.
Endoscopic laryngotracheal reconstruction may not be recommended if the airway is severely narrowed or scarred.
You or your child may need help from a breathing machine for a limited period of time. This is called mechanical ventilation. Sedation also may be needed to help prevent the breathing tube from coming out. How long sedation or help breathing is needed depends on other medical conditions and age.
Most people stay in the hospital 7 to 14 days after open-airway laryngotracheal reconstruction surgery, but it may be longer. Endoscopic surgery is sometimes done on an outpatient basis, so you or your child may go home the same day or spend several days in the hospital.
Ongoing treatment and recovery after surgery varies depending on the procedure. Full recovery may take a few weeks to several months.
In the weeks after surgery, the surgeon does regular endoscopic exams in the office and operating room to check the airway healing. Speech therapy or other evaluations may be recommended to help with any voice or swallowing problems.

Laryngotracheal reconstruction care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.