Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a procedure done under general anesthesia. During this procedure, small electric currents pass through the brain, intentionally causing a brief seizure. ECT seems to change brain chemistry, and these changes can quickly improve symptoms of certain mental health conditions.
A full course of ECT often works when other treatments don't help. But this procedure may not work for everyone.
Much of the stigma attached to ECT is based on early treatments in which high doses of electricity were given without medicines to put people to sleep. This led to greater pain, more fear and anxiety, fractured bones, and other serious side effects.
ECT is much safer today. Although ECT still may cause some side effects, it now uses electric currents given in a controlled setting to get the most benefit with the fewest possible risks.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can greatly and rapidly improve severe symptoms of several mental health conditions, including:
ECT may be a good treatment when you can't tolerate medicines or you haven't found relief from other forms of therapy. A healthcare professional may recommend ECT:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Although ECT generally is safe, risks and side effects may include:
Before having your first ECT treatment, you'll need a full evaluation that usually includes:
This evaluation helps make sure that ECT is safe for you.
The ECT procedure itself takes about 5 to 10 minutes. That does not include the time needed for the healthcare team to prepare and for you to recover. ECT can be done during a hospital stay or as an outpatient procedure.
To get ready for the ECT procedure, you'll have:
At the start of the procedure, you'll get these medicines through your IV:
You may receive other medicines, depending on any health conditions you have or your previous reactions to ECT. For example, medicines may be given to help with nausea and headaches, as well as to control your heart rate and blood pressure.
During the procedure, your healthcare professional will monitor seizure activity by watching for movement in the feet or hands. Machines will monitor your brain, heart, blood pressure and oxygen use. You will be given oxygen through a mask and a mouth guard to protect your teeth and tongue from injury.
When you're asleep during the procedure and your muscles are paralyzed, the healthcare professional presses a button on the ECT machine. This causes a small amount of electric current to pass through the electrodes to your brain, producing a seizure that usually lasts less than a minute.
Because of the anesthetic and muscle paralysis, you aren't aware of the seizure. The only outward sign that you're having a seizure may be rhythmic foot or hand movements. Internally, activity in your brain increases greatly. An electroencephalogram (EEG) records the electrical activity in your brain. Sudden, increased activity on the EEG signals the start of a seizure. Then the EEG levels off, indicating that the seizure is over.
A few minutes later, the effects of the short-acting medicine that puts you to sleep, and the muscle relaxant, begin to wear off. You're taken to a recovery area, where the healthcare team monitors your recovery. When you wake up, you may be confused for a few minutes to a few hours or more.
In the U.S., ECT treatments generally are given 2 to 3 times weekly for 3 to 4 weeks — for a total of 6 to 12 treatments. The number and type of treatments you'll need depend on how severe your symptoms are and how fast they get better.
Generally, you can return to your usual activities a few hours after the procedure. But your healthcare team may advise you not to return to work, make important decisions or drive until one to two weeks after the last ECT in a series, or for at least 24 hours after a single treatment during maintenance therapy. You can resume activities when memory loss and confusion are no longer issues.
Many people begin to notice their symptoms getting better after about six treatments of electroconvulsive therapy. Full improvement may take longer, though ECT may not work for everyone. In comparison, a response to antidepressant medicines can take six weeks.
No one knows for certain how ECT helps treat severe depression and other mental illnesses. What is known, though, is that brain chemistry changes during and after seizure activity. These changes may build on one another, somehow reducing symptoms of severe depression or other mental illnesses. That's why ECT works best in people who receive a full course of multiple treatments.
Even after your symptoms get better, you'll still need ongoing depression treatment to prevent it from coming back. You may get ECT less often. But treatment often includes antidepressants or other medicines, and talk therapy, also called psychotherapy.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.