The common cold is an illness affecting your nose and throat. Most often, it's harmless, but it might not feel that way. Germs called viruses cause a common cold.
Often, adults may have two or three colds each year. Infants and young children may have colds more often.
Most people recover from a common cold in 7 to 10 days. Symptoms might last longer in people who smoke. Most often, you don't need medical care for a common cold. If symptoms don't get better or if they get worse, see your health care provider.
Illnesses of the nose and throat caused by germs are called upper respiratory tract infections.

                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
            
Most often, common cold symptoms start 1 to 3 days after someone is exposed to a cold virus. Symptoms vary. They can include:
The mucus from your nose may start out clear and become thicker and yellow or green. This change is normal. Most often, it doesn't mean that you have a bacterial illness.
For adults. Most often, you don't need medical care for a common cold. But see your health care provider if you have:
For children. Most children with a common cold don't need to see a health care provider. Get medical care right away if your child has any of the following:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Many viruses can cause a common cold. Rhinoviruses are the most common cause.
A cold virus enters the body through the mouth, eyes or nose. The virus can spread by:
These factors can increase the chances of getting a cold:
These conditions can occur along with your cold:
There's no vaccine for the common cold. You can take these steps to slow the spread of the virus and prevent illness:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.