Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Know the risk factors for teen suicide, the warning signs and the steps you can take to protect your teen.
Is your teen at risk of suicide? Some things, such as medical, family and social problems, can make some teenagers more likely to take their own lives. Learn how to tell if your teen might be at risk for considering suicide. And find out where to turn for help and treatment.
Many teens who attempt or die by suicide have a mental health illness. As a result, they have trouble coping with the stress of being a teen. They might have a very hard time dealing with rejection, failure, breakups, school troubles or family problems.
And they might not be able to see that they can turn their lives around. They also might not fully understand that suicide is a permanent response, not a solution, to a short-term problem.
It is important to say that teens often cope with stressful medical, physical and life events without attempting self-harm or suicide.
But it's a good idea to be aware of certain risk factors. Medical or physical issues that can raise the risk of suicide include:
Life circumstances that can raise the risk include:
Children who have attempted suicide in the past also are at greater risk.
Warning signs that a teen might be thinking about suicide include:
Some other warning signs might seem like typical teenage behavior:
Suicidal teens also might have personality changes or become very anxious or agitated when they experience some of the warning signs listed above.
If you think your teen is in danger right now, call 911, your local emergency number or a suicide hotline. In the United States, call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. It's available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 888-628-9454 (toll-free).
If you suspect that your teen might be thinking about suicide, talk to your teen right away. Don't be afraid to use the word "suicide." Talking about suicide won't plant ideas for self-harm in a child's head.
Ask how your teenager is feeling and listen. Don't dismiss your teen's problems. Instead, reassure your child of your love. Remind your teen that together, you can work through whatever is going on.
Also, seek medical help for your teen. Ask your teen's health care provider to guide you.
Your teen's health care provider will want to get a sense of what's going on from sources such as:
Teens who are feeling suicidal often need the help of a specialist. This can be a psychiatrist, psychologist or other licensed mental health professional.
You may find a health care professional who treats mental health in children. Or you might find one who will want to talk with the teen and parents, or the whole family.
In some cases, it may be hard for caregivers to keep a suicidal teen safe at home. The teen's provider or mental health professional may recommend treatment in a hospital or intensive outpatient program. Or they might suggest calling local crisis response services for help.
You can take steps to help protect your teen. For example:
If you're worried about your teen, have an honest talk with your child and get help right away.
Female 1: I have my ups and downs just like anybody else.
Male 3: I don't want you looking over my shoulder all the time.
Female 3: But you know your kid better than anybody else and if you think he's acting different than usual,
Male 1: acting really down, crying all the time for no good reason
Female 1: not able to sleep or sleeping too much,
Male 3: shutting their friends out or giving their stuff away,
Female 2: acting reckless, drinking, using drugs, staying out late,
Male 2: suddenly not doing stuff they used to love
Female 3: or doing stuff that's just not like him,
Male 1: it might be nothing to worry about. It might just be high school
Female 1: or it might be something more. He might be depressed.
Female 3: Not just feeling down, really depressed.
Male 2: It might be that your kid is thinking about killing himself.
Male 3: It happens more than you think, more than it should.
Female 3: And people say "I had no idea."
Male 1: "I thought it was just a phase he was going through."
Female 2: "I wish he had said something."
Female 3: when it's too late. So if you think your kids acting different, if she seems like a different person, say something.
Male 1: Say "What's wrong? How can I help?"
Female 2: and ask him straight out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"
Female 1: It doesn't hurt to ask. In fact, it helps.
Male 3: When people are thinking about killing themselves, they want somebody to ask.
Female 2: Maybe you're afraid you'll make it worse if you ask. Like you'll put the idea in their head.
Male 3: Believe me, it doesn't work that way.
Female 3: In fact, the best way to keep a teenager from killing herself is to ask, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"
Female 3: Well, here's what you don't say,
Male 3: "You're making too much of this."
Female 1: "That boy's not worth killing yourself over."
Female 3: "It's not going to solve anything."
Male 1: "You're just trying to get attention."
Male 2: "You're not going to kill yourself."
Female 2: "I'm sorry you're feeling so bad."
Female 3: "We'll get through this together."
Male 2: A lot of people think about killing themselves, adults and kids.
Male 3: Most of them never tried but some of them do, so if your kid says,
Male 2: take her seriously. Find someone she can talk to about it. Someone who knows how to help.
Female 2: Sometimes kids want to kill themselves because something happened--a breakup, a failure,
Female 1: but sometimes it goes deeper and it's not going to go away by itself.
Female 3: Get some help. Talk to your doctor,
Female 1: and make sure that your kid always has someone to turn to. Someone he trusts.
Female 3: Make a list together. Write down three, four, five names
Male 1: and put a suicide hotline number on there, too.
Male 3: Have him keep that list in his wallet so he always knows where to turn.
Female 2: If you have pills she could use to hurt herself, lock them up.
Male 2: If you have a gun, don't just lock it up. Get it out of the house, the bullets too.
Male 1: And one more thing, if you think your kid might be about to hurt himself, don't leave him alone.
Female 1: Take him to the emergency room.
Male 1: We all have our ups and downs but sometimes it's more than that.
Female 3: If you think something's wrong, the only way to find out is to ask.
Female 2: Ask straight-out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"
Male 2: Don't wait until you're sure. Trust your gut.
Female 1: and it can make a big difference,
I know what it feels like to say I'm so cold. One without the other. Lost in that hole. Don't think you are all alone. You have somewhere to go. This ain't a one-person show. Let someone out there lend you a hand. Don't go through this alone.
Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands.
Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands. Reach out to them. Reach out to them. Reach out to them.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.