Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Is your teething baby keeping you up at night? Understand how to soothe sore gums and care for your baby's new teeth.
When a baby's teeth start coming through the gums, it's known as teething. Teething might make your baby drool, act cranky and want to chew on things. It may cause gum pain. Here's how to help your baby get through the teething process with a smile.
Many babies start teething around 6 months of age. Others start teething a few months later. The two bottom front teeth called the lower central incisors are often the first to appear. The two top front teeth called upper central incisors usually come in next.
Often, teething doesn't cause symptoms. But teething babies can have symptoms such as:
Many parents and caregivers think that teething causes fever, diarrhea and crying. But these symptoms often have causes other than teething. Talk with your baby's healthcare professional if your baby cries a lot, gets diarrhea, or has a rectal temperature of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit (38 Celsius).
If your baby doesn't seem comfortable while teething, try these simple tips.
Use a clean finger or wet gauze to rub your baby's gums for two minutes. The pressure can ease your baby's discomfort. You can rub the gums as often as needed. If your baby is older than age 1, rub the gums with a piece of ice wrapped in a wet cloth.
Chill teething rings, pacifiers, or wet washcloths in the refrigerator. Do not freeze them. These chilled items can soothe a baby's gums. To help prevent cavities, don't dip these items in sugary substances. While your baby chews these items, watch to make sure your baby doesn't choke.
If your baby is older than age 1, you can offer a chilled piece of soft fruit such as a banana or chilled berries in a small mesh teether. But do not use hard foods that could cause choking.
Also do not use ice or frozen pops because these can cause frostbite of the gums. Make sure any teething rings are filled with distilled water instead of gel in case your baby's new teeth put a hole in a ring.
If your baby is very cranky, you can give infants' or children's pain medicines such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others). Stop use of the medicine after 1 to 2 days. Longer use can damage the liver or kidneys. 
If your baby usually breastfeeds but doesn't want to do so because of teething pain, try putting the breastmilk in a cup. You can feed your baby from the cup as needed for a short time. Or you could use a spoon or a syringe.
Teething can usually be handled at home. But call your baby's healthcare professional if your baby:
Run a soft, clean cloth over your baby's gums twice a day. Do this after the morning feeding and before bed. The cleansing can keep food debris, sugars, and germs from building up in your baby's mouth.
When your baby's first teeth appear, use a small, soft-bristled toothbrush to clean the teeth twice a day. You can start using a toothpaste containing fluoride, but only use an amount that's about the size of a grain of rice.
Once the first tooth comes in, ask your baby's dentist or healthcare professional if your child's teeth would benefit from a dental product called fluoride varnish. This is a higher concentration of fluoride applied by a healthcare professional.
Until your child is good at spitting out extra toothpaste, continue using an amount that's about the size of a grain of rice. Once your child can spit, you can use a pea-sized amount of toothpaste.
Be sure to schedule your child's first dental visit at or near your child's first birthday. At this visit the dentist likely will:
Remember, regular dental care during childhood helps start a lifetime of healthy teeth and gums.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign-up to get Mayo Clinic’s trusted health content sent to your email. Receive a bonus guide on ways to manage your child’s health just for subscribing. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Our e-newsletter will keep you up-to-date on the latest health information.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.