Diagnosing traveler's diarrhea typically involves taking a medical and travel history. A physical exam may be done to check for signs of dehydration. If symptoms are serious or don't resolve on their own, a stool sample may be done to check for microorganisms.
Traveler's diarrhea may get better without any treatment. But while you're waiting, it's important to try to stay hydrated with safe liquids, such as bottled water or water with electrolytes such as an oral rehydration solution (see below). If you don't seem to be improving quickly, several medicines are available to help relieve symptoms.
Anti-motility agents. These medicines — which include loperamide and drugs containing diphenoxylate — provide prompt but temporary relief by:
Anti-motility medicines aren't recommended for infants or people with a fever or bloody diarrhea. This is because they can delay clearance of the infectious organisms and make the illness worse.
Also, stop using anti-motility agents after 48 hours if you have stomach pain or if your symptoms worsen and your diarrhea continues. In such cases, see a doctor. You may need blood or stool tests and treatment with an antibiotic.
Before you leave for your trip, talk to your doctor about taking a prescription with you in case you get a serious bout of traveler's diarrhea.
Dehydration is the most likely complication of traveler's diarrhea, so it's important to try to stay well hydrated.
An oral rehydration salts (ORS) solution is the best way to replace lost fluids. These solutions contain water and salts in specific proportions to replenish both fluids and electrolytes. They also contain glucose to enhance absorption in the intestinal tract.
Bottled oral rehydration products are available in drugstores in developed areas, and many pharmacies carry their own brands. You can find packets of powdered oral rehydration salts, labeled World Health Organization (WHO)-ORS, at stores, pharmacies and health agencies in most countries. Reconstitute the powder in bottled or boiled water according to the directions on the package.
If these products are unavailable, you can prepare your own rehydrating solution in an emergency by mixing together:
You or your child can drink the solution in small amounts throughout the day as a supplement to solid foods or formula, as long as dehydration persists. Small amounts reduce the likelihood of vomiting. Breastfed infants also can drink the solution but should continue nursing on demand.
If dehydration symptoms — such as dry mouth, intense thirst, little or no urination, dizziness, or extreme weakness — don't improve, seek medical care right away. Oral rehydration solutions are intended only for urgent short-term use.
If you do get traveler's diarrhea, avoid caffeine, alcohol and dairy products, which may worsen symptoms or increase fluid loss. But keep drinking fluids.
Drink canned fruit juices, weak tea, clear soup, decaffeinated soda or sports drinks to replace lost fluids and minerals. Later, as your diarrhea improves, try a diet of easy-to-eat complex carbohydrates, such as salted crackers, bland cereals, bananas, applesauce, dry toast or bread, rice, potatoes, and plain noodles.
You may return to your normal diet as you feel you can tolerate it. Add dairy products, caffeinated beverages and high-fiber foods cautiously.
Call a doctor if you have diarrhea that is severe, lasts more than a few days or is bloody. If you are traveling, call an embassy or consulate for help locating a doctor. Other signs that you should seek medical attention include:
If you have diarrhea and you've just returned home from a trip abroad, share that trip information with your doctor when you call to make an appointment.
Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect.
The list below suggests questions to ask about traveler's diarrhea.
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask questions as they occur to you during your appointment.
Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions. Being ready to answer them may reserve time to go over points you want to talk about in-depth. Your doctor may ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.