Brain metastases happen when cancer begins elsewhere in the body and spreads (metastasizes) to the brain.
Brain metastases happen when cancer begins elsewhere in the body and spreads (metastasizes) to the brain.
Brain metastases happen when cancer cells spread from their original site to the brain. Any cancer can spread to the brain. But the most common types that spread are lung, breast, colon, kidney and melanoma.
Brain metastases may form one or more tumors in the brain. As they grow, they put pressure on surrounding brain tissue. This can cause symptoms such as headache, personality changes, confusion, seizures, vision changes, trouble speaking, numbness, weakness or loss of balance.
Treatment for people whose cancer has spread to the brain may include surgery, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy or chemotherapy. Other treatments might be used to decrease pain and symptoms caused by the cancer.
Symptoms caused by brain metastases can vary. They depend on location, size and how fast they're growing.
Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you have persistent signs and symptoms that concern you. If you've been treated for cancer in the past, tell your doctor about your medical history.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.
Brain metastases occur when cancer cells break away from their original location. The cells may travel through the bloodstream or lymphatic system and spread to the brain.
Cancer that spreads from its original location is known by the name of the primary cancer. For example, cancer that has spread from the breast to the brain is called metastatic breast cancer, not brain cancer.
Any type of cancer can spread to the brain. Some of the types that are more likely to spread include:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.