Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Good diabetes management and regular foot care help prevent severe foot sores that are difficult to treat and may require amputation.
Diabetes complications can include nerve damage and poor blood circulation. These problems can lead to skin sores (ulcers) on the feet that can get worse quickly.
The good news is that managing your diabetes and taking care of your feet can help prevent foot ulcers.
When you get a foot ulcer, it's important to get care immediately. Most lower leg and foot removals begin with foot ulcers. An ulcer that won't heal causes severe damage to tissues and bone. It may require surgical removal (amputation) of a toe, a foot or part of a leg.
Some people with diabetes are at higher risk than others. Factors that lead to a higher risk of amputation include:
Here's how to keep your feet healthy, how to know the signs that mean you need to see a health care provider and what happens if you need an amputation.
The best way to prevent complications of diabetes — including foot ulcers — is to manage your diabetes. This includes eating a healthy diet, exercising regularly, checking your blood sugar regularly and taking your medicine correctly.
Taking care of your feet will help prevent problems. It can also ensure you get medical care quickly when you see problems. Proper foot care includes the following:
Wash your feet every day. Wash your feet in lukewarm (not hot) water once a day. Dry them gently, especially between the toes. Use a pumice stone to gently rub the skin where calluses easily form.
Put talcum powder or cornstarch between your toes to keep the skin dry. Use a moisturizing cream or lotion on the tops and bottoms of your feet to keep the skin soft. Preventing cracks in dry skin helps keep bacteria from getting in.
Buy shoes that fit correctly. Buy comfortable shoes that provide support and cushioning for the heel, arch and ball of the foot. Avoid tightfitting shoes and high heels or narrow shoes that crowd your toes.
If one foot is bigger than the other, buy shoes in the larger size. Your provider may recommend specially designed shoes (orthopedic shoes). These shoes fit the exact shape of your feet, cushion your feet and make sure your weight is the same on both feet.
Your provider will look at your foot to figure out what is wrong and prescribe a course of treatment.
Treatments for foot ulcers depend on the wound. Most of the time, the treatment is to remove dead tissue or debris, keep the wound clean, and help with healing. Wounds need to be checked often, at least every 1 to 4 weeks.
When the ulcer causes severe loss of tissue or an infection that threatens your life, an amputation may be the only treatment.
A surgeon will remove the damaged tissue and keep as much healthy tissue as possible. After surgery, you'll stay in the hospital for a few days. It may take 4 to 6 weeks for your wound to heal completely.
In addition to your provider and surgeon, other medical professionals involved in your treatment may include:
Even after amputation, it's important to follow your diabetes treatment plan. People who've had one amputation are at higher risk of having another. Eating healthy foods, exercising regularly, controlling your blood sugar and not smoking can help you prevent more diabetes complications.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.