Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Nighttime panic attacks, also known as nocturnal panic attacks, can occur with no clear cause and awaken you from sleep. As with a daytime panic attack, you may sweat, have a rapid heart rate, tremble, be short of breath or breathe heavily. You also may feel flushed or chilled, be lightheaded, and feel a sense of impending doom. These alarming symptoms can mimic those of a heart attack or another serious medical condition. Although panic attacks are not comfortable, they aren't dangerous.
Nighttime panic attacks usually last only a few minutes. But it may take a while to calm down and go back to sleep after you have one. People who have nighttime panic attacks also tend to have daytime panic attacks.
It's not known what causes panic attacks. Underlying factors may include genetics, stress and certain changes in the way parts of your brain work. In some cases, an underlying condition, such as a sleep disorder, asthma or a thyroid condition, can cause symptoms of panic. Talk with your doctor or other healthcare professional about your symptoms and whether you need any tests for a possible underlying condition.
Nighttime panic attacks are treated with cognitive behavioral therapy, also called CBT, or medicines or both. CBT helps you learn how to retrain your body to react less to panic symptoms and manage anxious thoughts better so that you respond to panic attacks in a more effective way. These treatments can help make panic attacks less intense and prevent them in the future so you can get better sleep.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.