Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Hand-washing is an easy way to prevent infection. Know when and how to wash your hands, and how to get children into the hand-washing habit.
Frequent hand-washing is one of the best ways to keep from getting sick and spreading illness. Find out when to wash your hands and how to do it right.
Germs get on your hands from touching people, surfaces and objects throughout the day. You can infect yourself with these germs by touching your eyes, nose or mouth. Or you may spread the germs to other people.
You can't keep your hands germ-free. But washing your hands often with soap and water can help limit the spread of germs.
Also, wash your hands when they look dirty.
It's best to wash your hands with plain soap and water. Antibacterial soaps that you can buy without a prescription don't kill germs better than plain soaps.
You can use alcohol-based hand sanitizers when you don't have soap and water. If you use a hand sanitizer, make sure it has at least 60% alcohol. And wash your hands with soap and water as soon as you can.
Help children stay healthy by urging them to wash their hands often. Wash your hands with your children to show them how it's done.
Tell them to wash their hands for as long as it takes to sing the "Happy Birthday" song twice. This can keep them from rushing. Keep a step stool nearby for children who can't reach the sink.
Be sure to watch young children when they use alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Swallowing alcohol-based sanitizers can cause alcohol poisoning. Put hand sanitizer where children can't reach it between uses.
Hand-washing offers great rewards. If you make hand-washing a habit, it can play a big role in keeping you healthy.
Jason Howland: Most of us aren't aware we are doing it.
We touch our face between three to 30 times an hour.
The problem, says Dr. Gregory Poland, is what we touch beforehand is often riddled with germs.
Gregory Poland, M.D., Vaccine Research Group Mayo Clinic: Bathroom faucets, door handles, escalator rails, computer terminals, anything that is commonly touched by the public.
Jason Howland: But how germ-filled are common objects? Let's start with money.
Gregory Poland, M.D.: Bad but not highly transmissible.
Jason Howland: Touchscreens, devices, phones?
Gregory Poland, M.D.: Really, really bad.
Jason Howland: What about our computer keyboards?
Gregory Poland, M.D.: Those have been shown over and over again to be really grossly contaminated.
Jason Howland: These common surfaces aren't just gross. They can be a vehicle to spread cold and flu viruses, and make you sick. Dr. Poland offers these suggestions.
Gregory Poland, M.D.: First, keep your hands out of your eyes, nose and mouth. Second is either wash your hands with soap and water, or use hand sanitizer.
Jason Howland: And make sure you get your annual flu vaccine.
 For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jason Howland.
Ian Roth: Children often are taught at a young age to wash their hands — before eating and after using the restroom. It's an easy and effective way to stay healthy and avoid spreading disease.
But Dr. Gregory Poland, director of
Mayo Clinic’s Vaccine Research Group says adults could do much better at the sink.
Gregory Poland, M.D.: People go to the bathroom and they run their fingers under the water. Well, that does nothing. And, then they grab the dirty faucet, and they touch the dirty handle on the way out of the
bathroom.
Ian Roth: Dr. Poland says that in public washrooms there are often more bacteria on those faucets than in the toilet water. So, next time you’re at the
sink…
Gregory Poland, M.D.: So you wash your hands while singing happy birthday to yourself, you get between the fingers, the fingertips, the thumb, you turn the water off with a paper towel, and you open the door to leave with a paper towel and dispose of the paper towel. That's how you wash your hands — ideally, with warm, soapy water.
Ian Roth: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I’m Ian Roth.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.