Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Women's Health / How can I stop getting so many yeast infections?
Vaginal yeast infections are an unfortunate reality for many women. But if they keep coming back after treatment, there are some ways to help break the cycle.
Reducing — or even preventing — recurrent yeast infections may require lifestyle adjustments, changes in hygiene, and consideration of potential medical factors, says Denise M. Millstine, M.D., assistant professor of medicine and director of integrative medicine and health at Mayo Clinic in Arizona.
Dr. Millstine offers this advice on how to get this frustrating problem under control.
“Yeast grow when it’s warm and moist, so anything you can do to keep the pelvic area cooler may help,” Dr. Millstine says. This means opting for breathable fabrics like cotton underwear instead of synthetic fibers, which “trap heat, particularly if you live in a warm environment,” she says. Avoid wearing tight clothing that increases friction and irritation. If you use panty liners or pads, change them frequently to stay as dry as possible.
It’s essential to limit the types of products used vaginally. “Most women know to avoid douching, if they are worried about yeast infections, as well as any vaginal deodorants,” Dr. Millstine says. But even soaps and moisturizers should be chosen carefully. “If you are using a vaginal moisturizer, it should be a product that was created for vaginal use,” she says.
Read More: Vaginal health products worth buying
Diet plays a surprising role in yeast infections. Avoiding a diet high in sugar may lower the risk. Additionally, for those with diabetes, making sure blood glucose levels are well controlled will help reduce yeast infections, Dr. Millstine says.
Certain medications can make you more prone to yeast infections. “Most women are aware that taking an antibiotic may lead to a yeast infection,” says Dr. Millstine. But other drugs, including oral contraceptives (birth control pills), some diabetes medications, and steroids or medications that affect your immune system, also can increase the risk.
Maintaining a balanced microbiome is crucial. The microbiome is made up of bacteria and other microorganisms that help keep the vagina healthy and prevent infections like yeast overgrowth. “That might include taking a probiotic, avoiding unnecessary antibiotics and eating a diet that supports the microbiome — rich in fiber and fermented foods and low in added sugar,” Dr. Millstine says. She also emphasizes the importance of a strong immune system. Getting proper rest, regular exercise and managing your stress all can help prevent infections.
If you’re having recurrent yeast infections despite using over-the-counter treatment and making lifestyle changes, speak with your healthcare team. You may need repeated or escalated treatment in addition to changes in hygiene practices and lifestyle. Rarely, frequent infections could indicate an underlying condition such as undiagnosed diabetes or immune system issue, Dr. Millstine says. If you’re concerned, a medical evaluation is a good idea.
A gripping tale of redemption and resilience, an injured young man desperate for a second chance finds unexpected hope in the hands of a visionary medical team.
Discover more Women's Health content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Nathan K. LeBrasseur, Ph.D., Christina Chen, M.D.
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.

      Dr. Millstine is a women’s health internist and integrative medicine specialist at Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale, Arizona, where she lives with her husband and twin sons. She serves on the Editorial Board for the Mayo Clinic Health Letter and is the Medical Director for the women’s health blog on Mayo Clinic Press. Find her on Twitter @drdmaz.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.