Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Choosing the right birth control pill can be a challenge. Learn the pros and cons of different types of birth control pills.
Are you thinking of taking birth control pills? Birth control pills are some of the most used contraceptives. That's because they work well and they're easy to use. But there are a lot of choices.
How do you know which to choose? Here's a breakdown of birth control pill types to make it easier to know your choices.
There are two main kinds of birth control pills:
Combination birth control pills come in different mixtures of pills that have hormones, called active pills, and pills that don't have hormones, called inactive pills. The mix you choose depends on how often you want to have periods:
The dose of hormones in the active pills in combination birth control pills either stays the same or changes:
Most combination birth control pills have 10 to 35 micrograms of ethinyl estradiol, a kind of estrogen. People who are sensitive to hormones may want to take one of the pills with a lower dose of estrogen. But low-dose pills may cause more bleeding or spotting between periods than higher dose pills. This is called breakthrough bleeding.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently approved the first birth control pill you can get without a prescription. It's a progestin-only pill that the FDA first approved for prescription use only, then switched to being one you can get without a prescription.
For other types of birth control pills, including combination birth control pills, you need a prescription from a healthcare professional.
Combination birth control pills prevent the ovaries from releasing an egg. They also slow an egg's progress through the fallopian tubes, thicken cervical mucus and thin the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium. All these actions help keep sperm from joining the egg.
Progestin-only pills also slow an egg's progress through the fallopian tubes, thicken cervical mucus and thin the lining of the uterus to help keep sperm from reaching the egg. Some types of these pills also may keep the ovary from releasing an egg, called ovulation.
No. Your healthcare professional needs to know about your medical history and any medicines you take to find which birth control pill is right for you.
Your healthcare professional may tell you not to use combination birth control pills if you:
Your healthcare professional may tell you not to use the progestin-only pill if you:
Here are some possible benefits of combination birth control pills:
Here are some possible drawbacks of combination birth control pills:
Here are some possible benefits of progestin-only birth control pills:
Here are some possible drawbacks of progestin-only birth control pills:
You have many choices for birth control. If you want to take birth control pills, work with your healthcare professional to decide which type of birth control pill is right for you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more.  Click to view a preview and subscribe below.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.