The protection and privacy of your health information is a top priority for Mayo Clinic. At times you may need to access or obtain your medical records for personal needs, continuation of care or for other reasons. You can access the contents of your medical records online through Patient Online Services or request a copy through the Release of Information staff.
Electronic access to your health information is easy through Mayo Clinic Patient Online Services. You or someone you designate can access your electronic medical records from a computer or mobile phone from MayoClinic.org or the Mayo Clinic mobile app. Look up lab results, clinic notes, medical imaging results and more in an easy-to-navigate format.
You can create an online account through Mayo Clinic Patient Online Services to access your electronic medical records.
Creating your own account gives you 24/7 access to a select set of medical records. These records include lab results, radiology reports, clinical notes, a medication list, an allergy list, vaccinations and your upcoming appointment schedule. You may save or print your own copies of this information whenever you choose at no cost. You also can find:
Patient Online Services also allows you to upload, download and share documents, request records, and attach documents to messages for your care team.
If you are unable to find the information you need, you can request records from your Patient Online Services account or you may contact Mayo Clinic Release of Information through one of the methods below.
Health Information Management Services
Release of Information
Mayo Clinic
200 First St. SW
Rochester, MN 55905
To request records to be sent to someone other than yourself, complete the Authorization to Release Protected Health Information to a Third Party and send it to Mayo Clinic Release of Information. The authorization is available in Arabic, Somali, Hmong and Spanish translations.
If you have non-Mayo Clinic medical records to send for an upcoming appointment, please do not send them to the Mayo Clinic Release of Information team. They may be sent directly to your Mayo Clinic care team by attaching records to a message within Patient Online Services or as instructed by your care team.
If you have questions about the release of records, contact Mayo Clinic Release of Information at 507-284-4594 during business hours:
If you believe that a change needs to be made to your medical records, follow the instructions within the Medical Record Information for an Amendment Request. Submit a request using one of the methods below. If you have questions about the process for requesting a change to your medical records, call 507-538-7700 and select option 1.
Health Information Management Services
Attn: Amendment Request Specialist
Mayo Clinic
Campus Support Center
4500 San Pablo Road
Jacksonville, FL 32224
You can access your medical records online within Patient Online Services. You also can submit a request to have them sent to you. To access the electronic medical records for your child or someone for whom you are the legal representative, you can request a proxy access account.
You can request your images through Patient Online Services or by submitting a written request to Release of Information. We can provide a link by email to a cloud-based service that allows you full control to download, share and access digital copies of your medical imaging. We can send a copy of images on an encrypted CD by U.S. mail free of charge or by FedEx for a $45 flat fee and delivery within two business days.
There is no charge for you to receive your own medical records. However, at times Mayo Clinic may charge reasonable, cost-based fees to cover the expense of providing copies as allowed by law.
A patient's medical records can only be accessed or released with proper authorization from the patient or the patient's legal representative. Records may be released if the person signing on behalf of the patient has provided the necessary legal documentation stating that they are authorized to request and receive the patient's medical records.
Requests are typically processed within two weeks of receipt. Although we do our best to meet this turnaround time, there may be delays in processing. Federal privacy rules (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA) allow for up to 30 days to respond to requests for medical records.
You may contact your current health care provider to have medical records sent to Mayo Clinic. Contact your Mayo Clinic care team to identify what types of records are needed, to whom they should be sent and whether the records can be accessed through a health information exchange (HIE).
You may contact your Mayo Clinic care team to verify that it has received your medical records.
If you have questions about the release of records, contact Mayo Clinic Release of Information at 507-284-4594 during business hours.
You can view or request your billing information within your Patient Online Services account. For additional resources related to billing, refer to the bill and payment resources on MayoClinic.org.
To notify Mayo Clinic of a family member's death, please send an email to PATRECUPDREQ@mayo.edu. Include the following information:
To notify Mayo Clinic of an adoption, please provide a copy of one of the following required legal documents:
The following documentation is not acceptable:
You may provide the required document in one of two ways:
Adoptive parents can email a copy of the required legal document in its entirety to PATRECUPDREQ@mayo.edu or send via mail to the following address:
Mayo Clinic
Health Information Management Services
Attn: HIMS Data Integrity
Campus Support Center
4500 San Pablo Road
Jacksonville, FL 32224
Read answers to other frequently asked questions about adoption records:
Records for Adopted Patients: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.