Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Whether the symptoms seem obvious or are more subtle, take them seriously and get immediate medical care.
A heart attack usually causes chest pain for more than 15 minutes. The chest pain may be mild or severe. Some people don't have any chest pain or pressure.
Women tend to have more-vague heart attack symptoms, such as nausea or a brief or sharp pain felt in the neck, arm or back.
Older adults and people with diabetes may have no or very mild symptoms of a heart attack. Never ignore heart attack symptoms, even if they don't seem serious.
Heart attack symptoms can vary widely. For instance, you may have only mild chest discomfort while someone else has severe chest pain.
If you think that you're having a heart attack, immediately call 911 or your local emergency number.
If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only if there are absolutely no other options.
Movies and TV often portray heart attacks as dramatic, chest-clutching events. But heart attacks may begin with subtle symptoms. The chest discomfort may not even be described as pain.
Many people have warning symptoms that happen hours, days or weeks in advance. For example, chest pain or pressure that keeps happening and doesn't go away with rest may be an early warning sign of a heart attack.
Never ignore heart attack symptoms, even if they don't seem serious.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.