Your healthcare professional may feel the area around the affected bone for tenderness, swelling or warmth. If you have a foot sore, your healthcare professional may use a dull probe to see how close the sore is to the bone under it.
You also might have tests to diagnose osteomyelitis and to find out which germ is causing the infection. Tests may include blood tests, imaging tests and a bone biopsy.
Blood tests can show high levels of white blood cells and other markers in the blood that may mean that your body is fighting an infection. Blood tests also may show which germs caused the infection.
No blood test can tell whether you have osteomyelitis. But blood tests can help your healthcare professional decide what other tests and procedures you may need.
A bone biopsy can show what type of germ has infected your bone. Knowing the type of germ helps your healthcare professional choose an antibiotic that works well for the type of infection you have. 
For an open biopsy, you're put to sleep with medicine called a general anesthetic. Then you have surgery to get to the bone to take a sample.
For a needle biopsy, a surgeon puts a long needle through your skin and into your bone to take a sample. This procedure uses medicine to numb the area where the needle is inserted. The medicine is called a local anesthetic. The surgeon may use an X-ray or other imaging scan to guide the needle.
Most often, treatment for osteomyelitis involves surgery to remove parts of the bone that are infected or dead. Then you get antibiotics through a vein, called intravenous antibiotics.
Depending on how bad the infection is, osteomyelitis surgery may involve one or more of the following procedures:

Restore blood flow to the bone. The surgeon may fill any empty space the debridement procedure leaves with a piece of bone or other tissue. This might be skin or muscle from another part of the body.
Sometimes the surgeon puts short-term fillers in the space until you're healthy enough to have a bone graft or tissue graft. The graft helps your body repair damaged blood vessels and form new bone.
Your healthcare professional chooses an antibiotic based on the germ causing the infection. You are likely to get the antibiotic through a vein in your arm for about six weeks. If your infection is more serious, you may then need to take antibiotics by mouth.
If you smoke, quitting smoking can help speed healing. You also need to manage any long-term conditions you have. For instance, control your blood sugar if you have diabetes.
You'll likely start by seeing your main healthcare professional. This person may send you to a doctor who specializes in infectious diseases or to an orthopedic surgeon.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For osteomyelitis, some questions to ask include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask questions, such as:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.