An acoustic neuroma, also known as a vestibular schwannoma, is a noncancerous tumor. It develops on the balance nerve, known as the vestibular nerve, and on the auditory nerve, known as the cochlear nerve. These nerves lead from the inner ear to the brain, as shown in the top image. The pressure on the nerve from the tumor may cause hearing loss and imbalance. In some cases, the tumor may grow and affect the cerebellum or other brain tissues, as shown in the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and illustrations above.
An acoustic neuroma, also known as a vestibular schwannoma, is a noncancerous tumor. It develops on the balance nerve, known as the vestibular nerve, and on the auditory nerve, known as the cochlear nerve. These nerves lead from the inner ear to the brain, as shown in the top image. The pressure on the nerve from the tumor may cause hearing loss and imbalance. In some cases, the tumor may grow and affect the cerebellum or other brain tissues, as shown in the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and illustrations above.
An acoustic neuroma is a noncancerous tumor that develops on the main nerve leading from the inner ear to the brain. This nerve is called the vestibular nerve. Branches of the nerve directly affect balance and hearing. Pressure from an acoustic neuroma can cause hearing loss, ringing in the ear and trouble with balance. Another name for an acoustic neuroma is vestibular schwannoma.
An acoustic neuroma develops from the Schwann cells covering the vestibular nerve. A Schwann cell helps protect and support other nerve cells in the body. An acoustic neuroma is usually slow growing. Rarely, it may become large enough to press against the brain and affect vital functions.
Treatments for an acoustic neuroma include monitoring, radiation and surgical removal.
Symptoms of an acoustic neuroma often are easy to miss and may take years to develop. Symptoms may occur because of the tumor's effects on the hearing and balance nerves. The tumor also can put pressure on the facial nerve that directs facial muscles and the trigeminal nerve that affects feeling in the face. Blood vessels or other brain structures also can be affected by an acoustic neuroma.
As the tumor grows, it may be more likely to cause more noticeable or worse symptoms.
Common signs and symptoms of an acoustic neuroma include:
Rarely, an acoustic neuroma may grow large enough to compress the brainstem and become life-threatening.
See a healthcare professional if you notice hearing loss in one ear, ringing in your ear or trouble with balance.
Early diagnosis of an acoustic neuroma may help keep the tumor from growing large enough to cause complications such as total hearing loss.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.
The cause of acoustic neuromas can sometimes be linked to a change to a gene on chromosome 22. Typically, this gene produces a tumor suppressor protein that helps regulate the growth of Schwann cells covering the nerves. Experts don't know what causes this change to the gene. Often there is no known cause. In some people, the gene change is related to a rare condition called NF2-related schwannomatosis, also known as NF2. The condition was previously known as neurofibromatosis type 2. People with NF2 usually have growth of tumors on the hearing and balance nerves on both sides of the head. These tumors are known as bilateral vestibular schwannomas.
In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant disorder — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene, The person has a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.
In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant disorder — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene, The person has a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.
The only confirmed risk factor for acoustic neuromas is having a parent with the rare genetic condition NF2-related schwannomatosis, also known as NF2. However, only a small number of people with acoustic neuromas have NF2.
A hallmark characteristic of NF2 is noncancerous tumors on the balance nerves on both sides of the head. Tumors also may develop on other nerves.
NF2 is known as an autosomal dominant condition. This means that the gene related to the condition can be passed to a child by just one parent. Each child of an affected parent has a 50-50 chance of inheriting it.
An acoustic neuroma may cause permanent complications, including:
Large tumors may press on the brainstem, occasionally preventing the flow of cerebrospinal fluid between the brain and spinal cord. Fluid can build up in your head, a condition known as hydrocephalus. This increases the pressure inside the skull.
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.