Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Diet and lifestyle changes may help control ulcerative colitis symptoms and lengthen the time between flare-ups.
An ulcerative colitis flare-up is the return of symptoms after not having any for a period of time. This may involve diarrhea, belly pain and cramping, rectal pain and bleeding, fatigue, and urgent bowel movements. Although you may feel helpless against the return of symptoms, changes in your diet and lifestyle may help control your symptoms and lengthen the time between flare-ups.
Skip the dairy aisle. There's no firm evidence that diet causes ulcerative colitis. But certain foods and beverages can make your symptoms worse, especially during a flare-up.
Dairy foods are one possible cause. Try limiting or eliminating milk, yogurt, cheese, ice cream and other dairy products. This may help reduce symptoms of diarrhea, abdominal pain and gas.
Say no to fiber if it's a problem food. In general, high-fiber foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains, are excellent sources of nutrition. However, if you have ulcerative colitis, these foods may make your symptoms worse.
Steer clear of nuts, seeds, corn and popcorn. See if you notice a difference in your symptoms. You may need to skip raw fruits and vegetables as well, but don't give up on this food group entirely. Try steaming, baking, roasting or even grilling your favorite produce.
Be smart about beverages. Drink plenty of liquids every day. Water is the best choice.
The alcohol in beer, wine and mixed drinks can stimulate your intestines and make diarrhea worse. The same is true of beverages that contain caffeine, such as soda, iced tea and coffee. Carbonated drinks also can be trouble because they often produce gas.
Manage stress. While stress doesn't cause ulcerative colitis, it may make your symptoms worse and trigger flare-ups. Exercise may help reduce tension and keep your bowels working properly.
Focus on activities you like, such as biking, walking, yoga and swimming. Your health care team can help you come up with an exercise plan that's right for you.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.