A thorough physical exam, medical history and testing are required to diagnose tachycardia.
To diagnose tachycardia, a healthcare professional examines you and asks questions about your symptoms, health habits and medical history.
An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) is a simple test to determine how the heart is beating. Sensors, called electrodes, are placed on the chest to record the heart's electrical signals. The signals are shown as waves on an attached computer monitor or printer.
An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) is a simple test to determine how the heart is beating. Sensors, called electrodes, are placed on the chest to record the heart's electrical signals. The signals are shown as waves on an attached computer monitor or printer.
A Holter monitor is a small, wearable device that continuously checks the heartbeat. It uses one or more sensors called electrodes and a recording device to measure the heart's activity. The device is typically worn for a day or more during daily activities.
A Holter monitor is a small, wearable device that continuously checks the heartbeat. It uses one or more sensors called electrodes and a recording device to measure the heart's activity. The device is typically worn for a day or more during daily activities.
In a coronary angiogram, a flexible tube called a catheter is inserted into an artery, usually in the groin, arm or neck. It's guided to the heart. A coronary angiogram can show blocked or narrowed blood vessels in the heart.
In a coronary angiogram, a flexible tube called a catheter is inserted into an artery, usually in the groin, arm or neck. It's guided to the heart. A coronary angiogram can show blocked or narrowed blood vessels in the heart.
Tests may be done to confirm an unusually fast heartbeat and to look for the cause. Tests to diagnose tachycardia may include:
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG). This quick test checks the heartbeat. Sticky patches, called electrodes, are attached to the chest and sometimes to the arms or legs. An ECG shows how fast or how slow the heart is beating.
Some personal devices, such as smartwatches, can do ECGs. Ask your care team if this is an option for you.
Electrophysiological (EP) study. This test may be done to confirm a diagnosis of tachycardia. It can help find where in the heart the incorrect signaling occurs. An EP study is mostly used to diagnose some specific types of tachycardias and irregular heartbeats.
During this test, one or more flexible tubes are guided through a blood vessel, usually in the groin, to various areas in the heart. Sensors on the tips of the tubes record the heart's electrical signals.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your tachycardia-related health concerns
					Start Here


The goals of tachycardia treatment are to slow a rapid heartbeat and to prevent future episodes of a fast heart rate.
If another health condition is causing tachycardia, treating the underlying problem may reduce or prevent episodes of a fast heartbeat.
A fast heart rate may correct itself. But sometimes medicine or other treatments are needed to slow down the heartbeat.
Tachycardia treatment involves taking steps to prevent the heart from beating too fast. This may involve medicines, implanted devices, or heart surgeries or procedures.
Catheter ablation. In this procedure, the doctor inserts thin, flexible tubes called catheters through a blood vessel, usually in the groin. Sensors on the tip of the catheters use heat or cold energy to create tiny scars in the heart. The scars block irregular electrical signals. This helps restore a typical heartbeat.
Catheter ablation doesn't require surgery to reach the heart, but it may be done at the same time as other heart surgeries.
An implantable device, such as a pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), may be used to treat some types of tachycardia.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
If you have tachycardia or any type of heart disease, it's important to take steps to keep your heart healthy. Steps include lifestyle changes such as eating a heart-healthy diet, getting regular exercise, and not smoking or using tobacco. Your care team also may suggest that you limit or avoid caffeine.
Stress-relief techniques, such as meditation and yoga, might help slow the heartbeat. This can reduce tachycardia symptoms.
If you have a plan to manage an episode of a fast heartbeat, you may feel calmer and more in control when one occurs. Ask your care team:
If you have tachycardia, you may see a doctor trained in heart conditions. This type of healthcare professional is called a cardiologist. You also might see a doctor trained in heart rhythm disorders, called an electrophysiologist.
There's often a lot to discuss at a health checkup. It's a good idea to be prepared for your appointment. Here's some information to help you get ready.
Make a list ahead of time that you can share with your healthcare team. Your list should include:
Basic questions to ask your healthcare professional include:
Don't hesitate to ask additional questions.
Your healthcare team is likely to ask you many questions. Being ready to answer them may save time to go over any details you want to spend more time on. Your care team may ask:
Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.