In addition to giving you a general physical exam, your health care professional will likely do the following during your appointment:
You'll also be asked questions about your medical history, diet, exercise habits and stools. For some people, the information from this appointment may be enough for a diagnosis and treatment plan.
For other people, one or more additional tests may be needed to help the health care team understand the nature or cause of constipation.
Your health care professional may send samples of your blood to a lab to test for diseases or conditions that can cause constipation.
Your health care professional may order a procedure called an endoscopy. A small tube with a camera is guided into the colon. This can reveal the condition of the colon or the presence of irregular tissues. Before this procedure, you may have a limited diet, use an enema or drink solutions that clean out your colon. There are generally two types of tests:
Depending on your symptoms, your health care professional may order X-ray imaging. An X-ray can show where stool is present in the colon and if the colon is blocked. Imaging tests, such as a CT scan or MRI, may be needed to diagnose conditions that may be causing constipation.
Your health care professional may order a test that tracks the movement of stool through the colon. This is called a colorectal transit study. Such studies include:
Other tests may be used to measure how well the rectum and anus work and how well a person can pass stool.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your constipation-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment for constipation usually begins with diet and lifestyle changes meant to increase the speed at which stool moves through the colon. Also, your health care professional may change the medicines you take if they may be causing or worsening constipation. If those changes don't help, other treatments may be necessary.
Your doctor may recommend the following changes to relieve your constipation:
Prunes, also called dried plums, have long been used to treat or prevent constipation. Prunes are a good source of fiber, but they also have naturally present agents that draw fluids into the colon.
Laxatives are medicines that help move stool through the colon. Each laxative works somewhat differently. The following are available without prescriptions:
An enema is a fluid gently pumped into the rectum to help pass stool. An enema may be used when other treatments don't work. Your health care professional may use one of these if the rectum is blocked with stool. Some are also available without prescription. The fluid may be:
A suppository is a small tube-shaped object placed in the rectum to deliver a medicine. The suppository melts at body temperature and releases the medicine. Suppositories for constipation may have one of the following:
Your health care professional may prescribe other medicines if other treatments don't work. These include:
If constipation is caused by opioid pain medicine, you may take a prescription medicine that blocks the effect of opioids on stool movement through the colon. These include:
Biofeedback training involves working with a therapist who uses devices to help you learn to relax muscles and coordinate the use of muscles in your pelvis, rectum and anus. These exercises may correct problems with chronic constipation.
Sensors in the rectum and on the skin provide feedback as sound or light on a device as the therapist helps you go through various exercises. These cues help train you to control the muscles needed to pass stool.
Surgery may be necessary to correct damage or irregularities in the tissues or nerves of the colon or rectum. Surgery is usually done only when other treatments for chronic constipation haven't worked.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Researcher are studying the use of probiotics and acupuncture to treat constipation. Further research is needed to understand these options.
You'll likely first see your doctor or other general health care professional. You may be referred to a specialist in digestive disorders, called a gastroenterologist.
Because appointments can be brief, and because there's often a lot of information to cover, it's a good idea to be well prepared. Here's some information to help you get ready, and what to expect from your doctor.
For constipation, some questions you might want to ask your doctor include:
In addition to the questions that you've prepared to ask your doctor, don't hesitate to ask other questions during your appointment.
Your doctor is likely to ask you several questions. Your doctor may ask:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.