Get answers to the most commonly asked questions about the Mayo Clinic Diet.
Get answers to the most commonly asked questions about the Mayo Clinic Diet.
All these features are available the moment you join:
Please visit the page About the Mayo Clinic Diet to learn more about the program. 
Whole-health focus – nutrition, habit change, movement, sleep and stress.
Clinician-built – rooted in years of Mayo Clinic medical expertise.
8 flexible meal plans with personalization via swap tools and the ability to "freestyle" to make the menus your own.
No calorie counting; unlimited fruit and vegetables with balanced portions.
Unlimited group coaching and community so you’re not in this alone.
No. The program teaches a food group “building-block” method – fill your plate with unlimited fruits and vegetables, then add lean protein, smart carbohydrates, and healthy fats. Portion visuals and the Diet Score keep you on track without spreadsheets.
Yes, our meal plans are meant to be sustained in any lifestyle at any budget.
Results may vary, we’ve found that our members have a weight loss of 6–10 lbs in the first two weeks.
We include easy to use at home workout videos to help make exercise a part of your busy life.
We know this is a commitment and we’re here to support you.  If our program is not a good fit, you can contact us within 3 days of purchasing the program to cancel your contract.  Please review our terms for details.
The Mayo Clinic Diet is built on a platform that has helped members lose 3x more weight and has an "Excellent" rating on Trustpilot where many members post 5-star reviews.
Yes! You’ll have access to a community of like-minded member who are there to support, nurture and educate.
If you decide you aren’t happy within 3 days, you can cancel your contract.  To be eligible, you must contact us within 3 days of purchasing the program.  Please review our terms for details.
At the Mayo Clinic Diet we believe the best diet is the one that will last, that’s why we’ve offered meal plans that will fit with any lifestyle.
The New Mayo Clinic Diet has extensive menus for both vegetarian and healthy keto.
You can view our meal plan options here. 
We find our families love the New Mayo Clinic Diet meal plans, and most often our families are happy to join in on the healthy meals.
Unlike other popular diets, the New Mayo Clinic Diet lets you access the program from anywhere.
Your privacy and data is of the the most importance to us, please read more here about the care we take in your personal data.
Your privacy is our utmost concern, please read our privacy policy.
The material on this website is provided for educational purposes only and is not to be used for medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.
Important: Before starting any weight loss program, it is highly recommended that you consult your physician or health care provider.
*Individual weight loss results may vary.
Visit our Help Center if you have any questions or contact us to get in touch.
The Mayo Clinic Diet helps you achieve lasting weight loss with custom meal plans and proven strategies.