To diagnose atherosclerosis, your healthcare professional examines you and listens to your heart. You usually are asked questions about your symptoms and your family health history. You may be sent to a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.
Your healthcare professional may hear a whooshing sound when listening to your heart with a stethoscope.
A coronary calcium scan uses computerized tomography (CT) imaging to take pictures of the heart's arteries. It can detect calcium deposits in the coronary arteries. Calcium deposits can narrow the arteries and increase the risk of a heart attack. The image on the left shows where the heart is typically located in the body (A). The middle image shows the area of the coronary calcium scan image (B). The image on the right shows a coronary calcium scan (C).
A coronary calcium scan uses computerized tomography (CT) imaging to take pictures of the heart's arteries. It can detect calcium deposits in the coronary arteries. Calcium deposits can narrow the arteries and increase the risk of a heart attack. The image on the left shows where the heart is typically located in the body (A). The middle image shows the area of the coronary calcium scan image (B). The image on the right shows a coronary calcium scan (C).
Tests may be done to check the health of your heart and arteries. Tests can help diagnose atherosclerosis and find the cause.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your arteriosclerosis / atherosclerosis-related health concerns
					Start Here


Treatment of atherosclerosis may include:
For some people, lifestyle changes may be the only treatment needed for atherosclerosis.
Many different medicines can slow — or even reverse — the effects of atherosclerosis. Medicines to treat atherosclerosis may include:
Statins and other cholesterol medicines. These medicines can help lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, also called the "bad" cholesterol. The medicines also can reduce plaque buildup. Some cholesterol medicines even can reverse the buildup of fatty deposits in the arteries.
Statins are a common type of cholesterol medicine. Other types include niacin, fibrates and bile acid sequestrants. You may need more than one type of cholesterol medicine.
If atherosclerosis causes a severe blockage in an artery, you may need a procedure or surgery to treat it.
Surgery or procedures for atherosclerosis may include:

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Lifestyle changes can help keep the arteries healthy. They also can prevent or slow atherosclerosis. The American Heart Association recommends these eight heart-healthy tips:
Some foods and herbal supplements may help lower cholesterol and blood pressure. Those two conditions are major risk factors for developing atherosclerosis. Possible alternative medicine products for atherosclerosis include:
Talk to your healthcare professional before adding supplements to your atherosclerosis treatment. Some supplements change the way medicines for atherosclerosis work. This could cause harmful side effects.
If you think you may have atherosclerosis or if you have a family history of heart disease, make an appointment for a health checkup. Ask if you need a cholesterol test.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For atherosclerosis, some basic questions to ask your healthcare professional are:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions.
Your healthcare team is likely to ask many questions, including:
It's never too early to make healthy lifestyle changes. Eat healthy, be active, get more exercise and don't smoke or vape. These are simple ways to protect yourself against atherosclerosis and its complications, including heart attack and stroke.

Arteriosclerosis / atherosclerosis care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.