Bipolar disorder, formerly called manic depression, is a mental health condition that causes extreme mood swings. These include emotional highs, also known as mania or hypomania, and lows, also known as depression. Hypomania is less extreme than mania.
When you become depressed, you may feel sad or hopeless and lose interest or pleasure in most activities. When your mood shifts to mania or hypomania, you may feel very excited and happy (euphoric), full of energy or unusually irritable. These mood swings can affect sleep, energy, activity, judgment, behavior and the ability to think clearly.
Episodes of mood swings from depression to mania may occur rarely or multiple times a year. Each bout usually lasts several days. Between episodes, some people have long periods of emotional stability. Others may frequently have mood swings from depression to mania or both depression and mania at the same time.
Although bipolar disorder is a lifelong condition, you can manage your mood swings and other symptoms by following a treatment plan. In most cases, healthcare professionals use medicines and talk therapy, also known as psychotherapy, to treat bipolar disorder.
There are several types of bipolar and related disorders:
These types may include mania, or hypomania, which is less extreme than mania, and depression. Symptoms can cause changes in mood and behavior that can't be predicted. This can lead to a lot of distress and cause you to have a hard time in life.
Bipolar II disorder is not a milder form of bipolar I disorder. It's a separate diagnosis. While the manic episodes of bipolar I disorder can be severe and dangerous, people with bipolar II disorder can be depressed for longer periods of time.
Bipolar disorder can start at any age, but usually it's diagnosed in the teenage years or early 20s. Symptoms can differ from person to person, and symptoms may vary over time.
Mania and hypomania are different, but they have the same symptoms. Mania is more severe than hypomania. It causes more noticeable problems at work, school and social activities, as well as getting along with others. Mania also may cause a break from reality, known as psychosis. You many need to stay in a hospital for treatment.
Manic and hypomanic episodes include three or more of these symptoms:
A major depressive episode includes symptoms that are severe enough to cause you to have a hard time doing day-to-day activities. These activities include going to work or school, as well as taking part in social activities and getting along with others.
An episode includes five or more of these symptoms:
Symptoms of bipolar disorders, including depressive episodes, may include other features, such as:
The timing of symptoms may be described as:
Also, bipolar symptoms may happen when you're pregnant. Or symptoms can change with the seasons.
Symptoms of bipolar disorder can be hard to identify in children and teens. It's often hard to tell whether these symptoms are the usual ups and downs or due to stress or trauma, or if they're signs of a mental health problem other than bipolar disorder.
Children and teens may have distinct major depressive or manic or hypomanic episodes. But the pattern can vary from adults with bipolar disorder. Moods can shift fast during episodes. Some children may have periods without mood symptoms between episodes.
The most noticeable signs of bipolar disorder in children and teenagers may be severe mood swings that aren't like their usual mood swings.
Despite their mood extremes, people with bipolar disorder often don't know how much being emotionally unstable disrupts their lives and the lives of their loved ones. As a result, they don't get the treatment they need.
If you're like some people with bipolar disorder, you may enjoy the feelings of euphoria and cycles of being more productive. But an emotional crash always follows this euphoria. This crash can leave you depressed and worn out. It could cause you to have problems getting along with others. It also could leave you in financial or legal trouble.
If you have any symptoms of depression or mania, see your healthcare or mental health professional. Bipolar disorder doesn't get better on its own. A mental health professional with experience in bipolar disorder can help you get your symptoms under control.
Thoughts about suicide and acting on these thoughts are common for people with bipolar disorder. If you're thinking about hurting yourself, or if you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or attempting suicide, get help. You can let a family member or friend know, contact a suicide hotline, call 911 or your local emergency number, or go to the emergency department. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
While it's not known what causes bipolar disorder, these factors may be involved:
Factors that may raise the risk of getting bipolar disorder or cause the first episode include:
Left untreated, bipolar disorder can lead to serious problems that affect every area of your life, including:
Sometimes what seems to be bipolar disorder might really be another disorder. Or, the symptoms of bipolar disorder might overlap with other disorders, and you also may have another health condition that needs to be treated along with bipolar disorder. Some conditions can make bipolar disorder symptoms worse or make treatment less successful.
There's no sure way to prevent bipolar disorder. But getting treated as soon as you notice a mental health disorder can help stop bipolar disorder or other mental health conditions from getting worse.
If you've been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, here are some ways you can stop minor symptoms from becoming full-blown episodes of mania or depression:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.