Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
The cause of wheezing may occur anywhere from your throat to your lungs. Any condition that causes irritation or inflammation — which usually includes swelling, redness, warmth and sometimes pain — in the airway can result in wheezing.
Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, also known as COPD, are the most common causes of wheezing that happens over and over again. Asthma and COPD cause narrowing and spasms, also known as bronchospasms, in the small airways of your lungs. Respiratory infections, allergic reactions, allergies or irritants can cause short-term wheezing.
Other conditions that can affect your throat or larger airways and cause wheezing include:
Causes shown here are commonly associated with this symptom. Work with your doctor or other health care professional for an accurate diagnosis.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.