Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection, also called a sexually transmitted disease, caused by bacteria. Sexually transmitted diseases are infections spread mainly by contact with genitals or bodily fluids. Also called STDs, STIs or venereal disease, sexually transmitted infections are caused by bacteria, viruses or parasites.
Gonorrhea bacteria can infect the urethra, rectum, female reproductive tract, mouth, throat or eyes. Gonorrhea is most commonly spread during vaginal, oral or anal sexual activity. But babies can get the infection during childbirth. In babies, gonorrhea most commonly affects the eyes.
Avoiding sexual activity and not having sex prevents the spread of gonorrhea. Using a condom during sexual activity can help prevent the spread of gonorrhea. Being in a mutually monogamous relationship, in which both partners have sex only with each other and neither partner is infected, also limits the risk of an infection.
The male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. Testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland mixes with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual activity.
The male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. Testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland mixes with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual activity.
The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina, also called the vaginal canal, make up the female reproductive system.
The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina, also called the vaginal canal, make up the female reproductive system.
In many people, gonorrhea infection causes no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they often affect the genital tract, but also may occur in other places.
Male symptoms of gonorrhea infection include:
Female symptoms of gonorrhea infection include:
Gonorrhea also can affect these parts of the body:
Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you notice symptoms such as a burning sensation when you urinate or a pus-like discharge from your penis, vagina or rectum.
Also make an appointment if your partner has been diagnosed with gonorrhea. You might not have symptoms, but if you have the infection, you can reinfect your partner even after your partner has been treated for gonorrhea.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Gonorrhea is caused by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The gonorrhea bacteria are most often passed from one person to another during sexual contact, including oral, anal or vaginal intercourse.
Sexually active women younger than 25 and men who have sex with men are at increased risk of getting gonorrhea.
Other factors that can increase your risk include:
Untreated gonorrhea can lead to major complications, such as:
Regular screening also is recommended for men who have sex with men. Their partners also should be tested.
A medicine called doxycycline may be an option to prevent infection among people at higher risk than average of getting gonorrhea. Higher risk groups include men who have sex with men and transgender women.
Taking doxycycline within 3 days of sexual activity lowers the risk of an infection with the bacteria that cause gonorrhea. Your healthcare professional can prescribe doxycycline and any testing you need while taking the medicine.
If you've been diagnosed with gonorrhea, do not have sex until after you and your sex partner have completed treatment and after symptoms are gone. This helps avoid getting gonorrhea again.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.