To diagnose a sore throat, a healthcare professional might:
A simple test can find streptococcal bacteria, the cause of strep throat. A healthcare professional rubs a sterile swab over the back of the throat to get a sample of mucus. The sample goes to a lab for testing.
Many clinics have a lab that can get a test result for a test called a rapid antigen test within minutes. But a test called a throat culture might give better results. A throat culture goes to a lab that returns results within 24 to 48 hours.
Rapid antigen tests aren't as sensitive as throat cultures, but they're quick. If the antigen test shows no strep, a healthcare professional might send a throat culture to a lab to check again for strep throat.
Usually, a sore throat caused by a virus goes away on its own in 5 to 7 days and doesn’t need treatment. Antibiotics don't treat a virus.
To ease pain and fever, many people use acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or other mild pain relievers.
For infants and children with sore throats, there are pain medicines you can get without a prescription that are made for them. These include acetaminophen (Children's Tylenol, Infants' FeverAll, others) or ibuprofen (Children's Advil, Children's Motrin, others).
Never give aspirin to children or teenagers because it has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition that causes swelling in the liver and brain.
A sore throat caused by a bacterial infection needs antibiotics to treat it.
Anyone taking an antibiotic must take all the medicine even if the symptoms are gone. Not taking all the medicine as directed can cause the infection to get worse or to spread to other parts of the body.
Not taking all the antibiotics to treat strep throat can raise a child's risk of a disease that can harm the heart, called rheumatic fever, or serious kidney inflammation.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about what to do if you forget a dose.
For sore throats from other illnesses than viral or bacterial infections, treatment depends on the diagnosis.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Use the following to ease the symptoms of a sore throat:
Although many alternative treatments are often used to soothe a sore throat, there's little proof that they work. And they might cause harm.
Check with your healthcare professional before using herbs. They can affect medicines. They might not be safe for children, people who are pregnant or breastfeeding, and people with certain health conditions.
Herbal or alternative products for a sore throat often come as teas, sprays or lozenges. They include:
You're likely to start by seeing your family healthcare professional. You then might be referred to a specialist in ear, nose and throat (ENT) problems. Or you might be referred to an allergy specialist, known as an allergist.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
For a sore throat, some questions to ask include:
Your healthcare professional is likely to ask questions, including:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.