A swollen knee occurs when excess fluid collects in or around your knee joint. Healthcare professionals might refer to this condition as an effusion (uh-FU-zhun) in your knee joint.
A swollen knee may be the result of trauma, overuse injuries, or an underlying disease or condition. To find the cause of the swelling, your healthcare team might need to test a sample of the fluid for infection, disease or blood from an injury.
Removing some of the fluid may help reduce the pain and stiffness associated with the swelling. Once the underlying cause is known, treatment can begin.
See your healthcare professional if self-care measures, such as ice and rest, don't improve symptoms. Seek immediate medical attention if one knee has a change in skin color and feels warm to the touch compared with your other knee. This can be a sign of infection within the joint.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Many things can cause a swollen knee. They include traumatic injuries to diseases and other conditions.
Damage to any part of your knee can cause excess joint fluid to accumulate. Injuries that can cause fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include:

      The anterior cruciate ligament, also called ACL, is one of the key ligaments that help stabilize the knee joint. The ACL connects the thighbone to the shinbone. The thighbone also is called the femur. The shinbone also is called the tibia. The ACL most commonly is torn during sports that involve sudden stops and changes in direction — such as basketball, soccer, tennis and volleyball.
      

        The meniscus is a C-shaped piece of tough, rubbery cartilage that acts as a shock absorber between the shinbone and the thighbone. It can be torn if you suddenly twist your knee while bearing weight on it.
        
Underlying diseases and conditions that can produce fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include:
Factors that may increase your risk of a swollen knee include:
Complications of a swollen knee can include:
A swollen knee is typically the result of an injury or chronic health condition. To manage your overall health and prevent injuries:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.