An endoscopy procedure involves inserting a long, flexible tube called an endoscope down your throat and into your esophagus. A tiny camera on the end of the endoscope allows views of your esophagus, stomach and the beginning of your small intestine, called the duodenum.
An endoscopy procedure involves inserting a long, flexible tube called an endoscope down your throat and into your esophagus. A tiny camera on the end of the endoscope allows views of your esophagus, stomach and the beginning of your small intestine, called the duodenum.
A healthcare professional might be able to diagnose GERD based on a history of symptoms and a physical examination.
To confirm a diagnosis of GERD, or to check for complications, a care professional might recommend:
Upper endoscopy. An upper endoscopy uses a tiny camera on the end of a flexible tube to visually examine the upper digestive system. The camera helps provide a view of the inside of the esophagus and stomach. Test results may not show when reflux is present, but an endoscopy may find inflammation of the esophagus or other complications.
An endoscopy also can be used to collect a sample of tissue, called a biopsy, to be tested for complications such as Barrett esophagus. In some instances, if a narrowing is seen in the esophagus, it can be stretched or dilated during this procedure. This is done to improve trouble swallowing.
Ambulatory acid (pH) probe test. A monitor is placed in the esophagus to identify when, and for how long, stomach acid regurgitates there. The monitor connects to a small computer that's worn around the waist or with a strap over the shoulder.
The monitor might be a thin, flexible tube, called a catheter, that's threaded through the nose into the esophagus. Or it might be a clip that's placed in the esophagus during an endoscopy. The clip passes into the stool after about two days.
X-ray of the upper digestive system. X-rays are taken after drinking a chalky liquid that coats and fills the inside lining of the digestive tract. The coating allows a healthcare professional to see a silhouette of the esophagus and stomach. This is particularly useful for people who are having trouble swallowing.
Sometimes, an X-ray is done after swallowing a barium pill. This can help diagnose a narrowing of the esophagus that's interfering with swallowing.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)-related health concerns
					Start Here


A healthcare professional is likely to recommend trying lifestyle changes and nonprescription medicines as a first line of treatment. If you don't experience relief within a few weeks, prescription medicine and additional testing may be recommended.
If you start taking a nonprescription medicine for GERD, be sure to inform your care provider.
Prescription-strength treatments for GERD include:
Prescription-strength proton pump inhibitors. These include esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec), pantoprazole (Protonix), rabeprazole (Aciphex) and dexlansoprazole (Dexilant).
Although generally well tolerated, these medicines might cause diarrhea, headaches, nausea or, in rare instances, low vitamin B-12 or magnesium levels.
A technique known as diaphragmatic breathing may help improve GERD symptoms for some people. This exercise is done after eating. It involves breathing deeply into the diaphragm rather than shallowly into the chest. Diaphragmatic breathing techniques should ideally be taught by a trained medical professional.
GERD can usually be controlled with medicine. But if medicines don't help or you wish to avoid long-term medicine use, a healthcare professional might recommend:
Transoral incisionless fundoplication (TIF). This new procedure involves tightening the lower esophageal sphincter by creating a partial wrap around the lower esophagus using polypropylene fasteners. TIF is performed through the mouth by using an endoscope and requires no surgical incision. Its advantages include quick recovery time and high tolerance.
If you have a large hiatal hernia, TIF alone is not an option. However, TIF may be possible if it is combined with laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair.
Because obesity can be a risk factor for GERD, a healthcare professional could suggest weight-loss surgery as an option for treatment. Talk with your healthcare team to find out if you're a candidate for this type of surgery.
Surgery for GERD may involve a procedure to reinforce the lower esophageal sphincter. The procedure is called Nissen fundoplication. In this procedure, the surgeon wraps the top of the stomach around the lower esophagus. This reinforces the lower esophageal sphincter, making it less likely that acid might back up in the esophagus.
Surgery for GERD may involve a procedure to reinforce the lower esophageal sphincter. The procedure is called Nissen fundoplication. In this procedure, the surgeon wraps the top of the stomach around the lower esophagus. This reinforces the lower esophageal sphincter, making it less likely that acid might back up in the esophagus.
The LINX device is an expandable ring of magnetic beads that keeps stomach acid from backing up into the esophagus, but allows food to pass into the stomach.
The LINX device is an expandable ring of magnetic beads that keeps stomach acid from backing up into the esophagus, but allows food to pass into the stomach.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to
                            digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any
                            time. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive
                                emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.
If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us
                                at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Lifestyle changes may help reduce the frequency of acid reflux. Try to:
Some complementary and alternative therapies, such as ginger, chamomile and slippery elm, may be recommended to treat GERD. However, none have been proved to treat GERD or reverse damage to the esophagus. Talk to a healthcare professional if you're considering taking alternative therapies to treat GERD.
You may be referred to a doctor who specializes in the digestive system, called a gastroenterologist.
In addition to the questions that you've prepared, don't hesitate to ask questions during your appointment anytime you don't understand something.
You're likely to be asked a few questions. Being ready to answer them may leave time to go over points you want to spend more time on. You may be asked:

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) care at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.