Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Are there any type 2 diabetes medicines that can help people lose weight and lower their blood sugar? Are there side effects?
There are two main groups of type 2 diabetes medicines that lower blood sugar and also may lead to weight loss. The first group is glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) agonists. The second is sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors.
GLP-1 agonists for type 2 diabetes are generally taken by a shot, also called an injection. Most are taken once a day or once a week. GLP-1 agonists include the following medicines.
Another form of semaglutide is available in a pill that's taken by mouth once a day. The brand name of that medicine is Rybelsus.
Tirzepatide (Mounjaro) is a similar kind of medicine called a dual-acting GLP-1/GIP agonist. It's also used to control blood sugar and can support weight loss. It is taken once a week by a shot.
All GLP-1 agonists can help with weight loss. But the amount of weight loss depends on the type of medicine and the dose. In general, studies have found that tirzepatide and semaglutide are the most effective for weight loss. Dulaglutide and liraglutide also have been found to be very effective. Other GLP-1 agonists appear to be somewhat less effective for weight loss. But people who take them still have better weight loss results than those who do not take the medicine.
GLP-1 agonists mimic the way a hormone called glucagon-like peptide 1 works in the body. When blood sugar starts to rise after a person eats, these medicines cause the body to make more insulin. The extra insulin helps lower blood sugar.
Lower blood sugar helps control type 2 diabetes. But it's not clear exactly how GLP-1 agonists lead to weight loss. They appear to curb hunger. They also slow the movement of food from the stomach into the small intestine. That means you may feel full faster and longer, so you eat less.
As with any medicine, there is a risk of side effects when taking a GLP-1 agonist. Some side effects can be serious. More common side effects often improve after taking the medicine for a while.
Low blood sugar is a more serious risk linked to GLP-1 agonists. The medical term for that condition is hypoglycemia. But the risk of low blood sugar typically only goes up when a person also is taking another medicine that's known to lower blood sugar. Examples include sulfonylureas and insulin.
GLP-1 agonists aren't recommended for people who:
Certain GLP-1 agonists may not be appropriate for people who have a health condition that affects the intestines, such as gastroparesis, or for people who have some types of kidney disease.
Studies have linked GLP-1 agonists with certain thyroid tumors in rats. But until more long-term studies are done, the risk to humans isn't known.
SGLT-2 inhibitors come in a pill that's taken once a day. They include the following medicines:
These medicines work in the kidneys where they help take extra sugar out of the blood that then goes out of the body in urine. This lowers blood sugar. It also can help with weight loss. The weight loss benefits of SGLT-2 inhibitors typically are less than those of GLP-1 agonists.
Side effects of SGLT-2 inhibitors may include:
Rarely, SGLT-2 may be linked to a higher risk of infection in the feet and lower legs. If an infection is serious, it could lead to the need for amputation. People who have had wounds on their feet or other problems with their feet or lower legs should talk with their healthcare professionals about the possible risks before taking an SGLT-2.
SGLT-2 inhibitors aren't recommended for people who have had diabetic ketoacidosis. They also may not be a good choice for people with certain types of kidney disease. 
Along with helping to control blood sugar and boosting weight loss, GLP-1 agonists and SGLT-2 inhibitors seem to have other health benefits.
Research has found that some of these medicines may lower the risk of certain serious health conditions, such as kidney disease, heart disease, heart failure and stroke. Many people who take these medicines also see their blood pressure improve. But it's not clear whether these benefits are from the medicine or a result of weight loss.
If you have type 2 diabetes and you want to find out if these medicines might be useful for you to lose weight, talk with your diabetes care team. They can help you decide what's best for your situation.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.