Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) occurs when lung swelling causes fluid to build up in the tiny elastic air sacs in the lungs. These air sacs, called alveoli, have a protective membrane, but lung swelling damages that membrane. The fluid leaking into the air sacs keeps the lungs from filling with enough air. This means less oxygen reaches the bloodstream, so the body's organs don't get the oxygen they need to work properly.
ARDS usually occurs in people who are already critically ill or have major injuries. People usually are severely short of breath — the main symptom of ARDS — within a few hours to a few days after the injury or infection that caused ARDS.
Many people who get ARDS don't survive. The risk of death gets higher with age and how severe the illness is. Of the people who survive ARDS, some fully recover. But others have lasting lung damage.
The seriousness of ARDS symptoms can vary depending on what's causing them and whether there is underlying heart or lung disease. Symptoms include:
ARDS usually follows a major illness or injury, and most people who have ARDS are already in a hospital. But if you have symptoms of ARDS and are not in a medical facility, go to the nearest emergency department right away or call 911 or your local emergency number for help.
The bronchioles are some of the smallest airways in the lungs. Inhaled air passes through tiny ducts from the bronchioles into elastic air sacs (alveoli). The alveoli are surrounded by the alveolar-capillary membrane, which typically prevents liquid in the capillaries from entering the air sacs.
The bronchioles are some of the smallest airways in the lungs. Inhaled air passes through tiny ducts from the bronchioles into elastic air sacs (alveoli). The alveoli are surrounded by the alveolar-capillary membrane, which typically prevents liquid in the capillaries from entering the air sacs.
Most people who get ARDS already are in a hospital for another condition. Many are critically ill. People are especially at risk if they have an infection, such as sepsis or pneumonia. They're also at higher risk if they have COVID-19, especially if they also have metabolic syndrome.
People who have alcohol use disorder or who use recreational drugs or smoke ― lifestyle habits that can harm the lungs ― are at higher risk of getting ARDS. Having a history of alcohol, drug or tobacco use also raises the risk of ARDS.
ARDS can cause other medical problems while in the hospital, including:
Thanks to better treatments, more people are surviving ARDS. But many survivors end up with potentially serious and sometimes lasting effects:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.