Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
If you're not sure about whether it's safe to eat seafood during your pregnancy, you're not alone. Understand the guidelines for pregnancy and fish.
Pregnancy nutrition can be confusing, especially when it comes to seafood guidelines. Here's help understanding the facts.
Seafood, which includes fish and shellfish, can be a great source of protein, iron and zinc. These are important nutrients for your baby's growth and development. The omega-3 fatty acids in many fish, including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), also can help with your baby's brain development.
But some types of seafood can have high levels of mercury. These include large, predatory fish such as shark, swordfish, king mackerel and tilefish. And canned chunk white tuna — also called albacore tuna  — may be higher in mercury than canned light tuna.  Although the mercury in seafood isn't a concern for most adults, special precautions apply if you're pregnant or planning to become pregnant. If you regularly eat fish high in mercury, mercury can build up in your bloodstream over time. Too much mercury in your bloodstream could damage your baby's developing brain and nervous system.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend that, in a week, pregnant people eat at least 8 ounces (224 grams) and up to 12 ounces (340 grams) of a variety of seafood lower in mercury. That's about 2 to 3 servings a week.
Eat a variety of seafood that's low in mercury and high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as:
However, limit white tuna — also called albacore tuna — and tuna steaks to 6 ounces (170 grams) a week.
Beyond seafood, other sources of omega-3 fatty acids include:
Keep in mind that researchers haven't yet determined whether supplements can promote your baby's brain development. While pregnant people can get omega-3 fatty acids from many sources, most experts advise eating seafood for this purpose.
Mercury can harm a developing baby's brain. But eating average amounts of seafood containing low levels of mercury during pregnancy hasn't been shown to cause problems. And the omega-3 fatty acids in many types of fish can promote a baby's healthy brain development. As long as you avoid fish known to be high in mercury or contaminated with pollutants, seafood can be a regular part of your healthy-eating plan during pregnancy.

        This guide offers research-backed advice to help you and your baby
        experience a healthy pregnancy, written by some of the world's leading
        medical experts.
      
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.