You may not know you have atrial fibrillation (AFib). The condition may be found when a health checkup is done for another reason.
To diagnose AFib, the health care provider examines you and asks questions about your medical history and symptoms. Tests may be done to look for conditions that can cause irregular heartbeats, such as heart disease or thyroid disease.
Tests to diagnose atrial fibrillation (AFib) may include:


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your atrial fibrillation-related health concerns
					Start Here


The goals of atrial fibrillation treatment are to reset and control the heartbeat and prevent blood clots.
Atrial fibrillation treatment may involve:
Together, you and your health care team discuss the best treatment option for you. It's important to follow your atrial fibrillation treatment plan. If AFib isn't well controlled, it may lead to other complications, including stroke and heart failure.
Treatment for atrial fibrillation may include medicines to do the following:
If atrial fibrillation symptoms are bothersome or if this is the first AFib episode, a doctor may try to reset the heart rhythm using a procedure called cardioversion.
Cardioversion is usually done in a hospital as a scheduled procedure. However, it may be done in emergency situations. If it's scheduled, a blood thinner such as warfarin (Jantoven) may need to be taken for a few weeks before the procedure. The medicine reduces the risk of blood clots and strokes.
After electrical cardioversion, medicines to control the heart rhythm may be needed for life to prevent future episodes of atrial fibrillation. Even with medicine, AFib could return.
Atrioventricular (AV) node ablation uses heat energy, called radiofrequency energy, to destroy the area between the upper and lower heart chambers. This area is called the AV node. The heart's electrical signals can't pass through the damaged area. So this treatment blocks the faulty heart signals that cause atrial fibrillation (AFib). Once the AV node is destroyed, a pacemaker is needed to control the heart rhythm.
Atrioventricular (AV) node ablation uses heat energy, called radiofrequency energy, to destroy the area between the upper and lower heart chambers. This area is called the AV node. The heart's electrical signals can't pass through the damaged area. So this treatment blocks the faulty heart signals that cause atrial fibrillation (AFib). Once the AV node is destroyed, a pacemaker is needed to control the heart rhythm.
If AFib doesn't get better with medicine or other treatments, a procedure called cardiac ablation may be necessary. Sometimes ablation is the first treatment.
Cardiac ablation often uses heat or cold energy to create tiny scars in the heart. The scars disrupt irregular heart signals and restore a typical heartbeat. A doctor inserts a flexible tube called a catheter through a blood vessel, usually in your groin, and into your heart. More than one catheter may be used. Sensors on the tip of the catheter apply the cold or heat energy.
Less commonly, ablation is done using a scalpel during open-heart surgery.
There are several types of cardiac ablation. The type used to treat atrial fibrillation depends on your specific symptoms, overall health and whether you're having another heart surgery.
Maze procedure. A doctor uses heat or cold energy or a scalpel to create a pattern — or maze – of scar tissue in the upper chambers of the heart. Scar tissue doesn't send electrical signals. So the maze interferes with the stray heart signals that cause atrial fibrillation.
If a scalpel is used to create the maze pattern, open-heart surgery is necessary. This is called the surgical maze procedure. It's the preferred AFib treatment in those who need another heart surgery, such as coronary artery bypass surgery or heart valve repair.
Atrial fibrillation may return after cardiac ablation. If this happens, another ablation or heart treatment may be recommended. After cardiac ablation, lifelong blood thinners may be needed to prevent strokes.
If you have AFib but can't take blood thinners, you may need a procedure to seal a small sac in the left upper heart chamber. This sac, called an appendage, is where most AFib related clots form. This procedure is called left atrial appendage closure. A closure device is gently guided through a catheter to the sac. Once the device is in place, the catheter is removed. The device stays in permanently. Surgery to close the left atrial appendage also is an option for some people with AFib who are having another heart surgery.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Following a heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent or treat conditions that can lead to atrial fibrillation (AFib). The following changes are recommended to improve heart health:
It's also important to have regular health checkups. Tell your health care team if your AFib symptoms get worse.
If you have an irregular or pounding heartbeat, make an appointment for a health checkup. If AFib is found early, treatment may be easier, and it may work better. You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases. This type of provider is called a cardiologist.
Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment.
For atrial fibrillation, some basic questions to ask your doctor include:
Don't hesitate to ask any other questions during your appointment.
During a health checkup, you are usually asked many questions. Being ready to answer them may save time to go over any details you want to spend more time on. You may be asked:
It's never too early to make heart-healthy lifestyle changes, such as quitting smoking, eating healthy foods and getting more exercise. A healthy lifestyle is the main protection against heart problems and heart-related complications.

Atrial fibrillation care at Mayo Clinic

Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.