A second-degree burn often looks wet or moist. It affects the first and second layers of skin, which are called the epidermis and the dermis. Blisters may develop, and pain can be terrible.
A second-degree burn often looks wet or moist. It affects the first and second layers of skin, which are called the epidermis and the dermis. Blisters may develop, and pain can be terrible.
Burns are tissue damage that results from too much sun, hot liquids, flames, chemicals, electricity, steam and other sources. Burns can be minor medical problems or life-threatening emergencies.
The treatment of burns depends on where they are on the body and how bad they are. Sunburns and small scalds can often be treated with first aid. Deep or widespread burns and chemical or electrical burns need medical care right away. Some people need treatment at specialized burn centers and monthslong follow-up care.
Your skin has three layers that house your sweat and oil glands, hair follicles, melanocytes, and blood vessels.
Your skin has three layers that house your sweat and oil glands, hair follicles, melanocytes, and blood vessels.
Third-degree burns involve all of the layers of skin and sometimes the fat and muscle tissue under the skin. The skin may appear stiff, waxy white, leathery or gray. These types of burns often need skin grafts to close the wound.
Third-degree burns involve all of the layers of skin and sometimes the fat and muscle tissue under the skin. The skin may appear stiff, waxy white, leathery or gray. These types of burns often need skin grafts to close the wound.
Radiation burns can be caused by X-rays or radiation therapy to treat cancer.
Radiation burns can be caused by X-rays or radiation therapy to treat cancer.
Burn symptoms vary depending on how deep the skin damage is. It can take a day or two for the symptoms of a severe burn to develop.
Take first-aid measures while waiting for emergency assistance.
A minor burn might need emergency care if it affects the eyes, mouth, hands or genitals. Babies and older adults might need emergency care for minor burns as well.
Call your healthcare professional if you experience:
Also call your health professional if you think you might need a tetanus booster. You may need a booster shot if you haven't had a tetanus shot in the past five years. Try to get this within three days of the injury.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Complications of deep or widespread burns can include:
Burns are very common, and most of them are preventable. Kitchen-related injuries from hot drinks, soups and microwaved foods are especially common among children. You can take steps to reduce the risk of household burns.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.