Your health care team might do a variety of tests:
If your test results show that you had a miscarriage or are at risk of having one, your health care professional might use one of the following medical terms to describe what happened:
If you have bleeding from the vagina early in your pregnancy, your health care team might recommend that you rest until your symptoms get better. Bed rest and other treatments haven't been proved to prevent miscarriage, but sometimes they're prescribed as a safeguard. Don't use tampons or have sex while you still have bleeding, because these could lead to an infection of the uterus.
In some cases, it's also a good idea to delay any traveling — especially to areas where it would be hard to get medical care quickly. Ask your health care team if you should put off any trips you've planned.
If tests show that you're having or will have a miscarriage, your health care team might recommend one of the following treatment choices:
After a miscarriage, if you are blood type Rh negative, you also may get a shot of medicine called Rh immunoglobulin. Ask your health care team about your blood type and need for Rh immunoglobulin. If you are RH positive, you will not need Rh immunoglobulin. The shot can help prevent problems with a future pregnancy. It's given to some people whose blood type is Rh negative, often depending on how many weeks they were pregnant. Rh negative means you don't have a protein in your blood called Rh factor. If you get pregnant again and the unborn baby is Rh positive — meaning its blood has the protein — that can lead to life-threatening anemia or other problems for the baby.
In most cases, physical recovery from miscarriage takes only a few hours to a couple of days. In the meantime, call your health care professional if you have:
Most people who have a miscarriage get their period about two weeks after any light bleeding or spotting stops. You can start using any type of birth control right after a miscarriage. But don't have sex or put anything in your vagina — such as a tampon — for 1 to 2 weeks after a miscarriage. This helps prevent an infection.
It's possible to become pregnant during the menstrual cycle right after a miscarriage. But if you and your partner decide to try again, make sure that your body and mind are ready. Ask your health care professional for advice about when you might try to conceive.
Keep in mind that miscarriage often happens just once. Most people who miscarry go on to have a healthy pregnancy after miscarriage. Only two percent of people have two miscarriages in row. And up to 1% have three miscarriages in a row.
If you have more than one miscarriage, think about getting tested to find any underlying causes. This can be especially helpful if you've had 2 to 3 pregnancy losses in a row. There's a chance tests could find conditions of the uterus, chromosome conditions, blood clotting problems or issues with the immune system. If the cause of your miscarriages can't be found, don't lose hope. It's still possible to have a healthy baby. Overall, people who've had three miscarriages still have a 60% to 80% chance of having a full-term pregnancy.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Emotional healing can take much longer than physical healing. Miscarriage can be a heart-wrenching loss that others around you might not fully understand. Your emotions might range from anger and guilt to despair. And your partner's emotions may seem different from your own. Give yourself time to grieve the loss of your pregnancy, and ask loved ones for help if you need it.
You might never forget your hopes and dreams surrounding this pregnancy, but in time acceptance might ease your pain. Talk to your health care professional if you feel ongoing sadness or stress. You might have a treatable condition such as anxiety, depression or post-traumatic stress disorder. Counseling sessions with a mental health professional may help. So might talking with people who've lost pregnancies in a miscarriage support group.
If you have symptoms of miscarriage, call your health care team right away. Depending on your situation, you might need urgent medical care.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment and know what to expect.
Below are some basic questions to ask your doctor or other members of your health care team about miscarriage:
Feel free to ask other questions during your appointment too — especially if you need more information or you don't understand something.
Your health care professional is likely to ask you some questions too. For example:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.