Type 2 diabetes happens when the body cannot use insulin correctly and sugar builds up in the blood. It was once called adult-onset diabetes.
Over time, high blood sugar levels in type 2 diabetes can damage the eyes, kidneys, nerves and heart. This can happen because the pancreas doesn't make enough of a hormone called insulin that helps sugar enter the cells. It happens also because the cells respond poorly to insulin by taking in less sugar.
Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood. Type 2 is more common in older adults. But the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more young people with type 2 diabetes.
There's no cure for type 2 diabetes. Losing weight, eating well and exercising can help manage the condition. If diet and exercise aren't enough to manage blood sugar, diabetes medicines or insulin therapy may help.
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes often come on slowly. In fact, people can live with type 2 diabetes for years and not know it. When there are symptoms, they may include:
See your healthcare professional if you have any symptoms of type 2 diabetes.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Type 2 diabetes is mainly the result of two issues:
Being overweight and not moving enough are key factors.
Insulin is a hormone that comes from a gland that sits behind and below the stomach. The gland is called the pancreas. Insulin manages how the body uses sugar in the following ways:
A sugar called glucose is a main source of energy for the cells that make up muscles and other tissues.
In type 2 diabetes, this process doesn't work well. Instead of moving into the cells, sugar builds up in the blood. As blood sugar levels rise, the pancreas releases more insulin. Over time, the cells in the pancreas that make insulin are damaged. Then the cells can't make enough insulin to meet the body's needs.
Factors that may increase the risk of type 2 diabetes include:
Type 2 diabetes affects many major organs. These include the heart, blood vessels, nerves, eyes and kidneys. Also, factors that raise the risk of diabetes are risk factors for other serious diseases. Managing diabetes and blood sugar can lower the risk for these complications and other medical conditions, including:
Healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent type 2 diabetes. If you have prediabetes, lifestyle changes may slow the condition or keep it from becoming diabetes.
A healthy lifestyle includes the following:
People with prediabetes may take metformin (Fortamet, Glumetza, others), a diabetes medicine, to lower the risk of type 2 diabetes. This is most often prescribed for older adults who are obese and who can't lower blood sugar levels with lifestyle changes.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.