A diagnosis of gender dysphoria includes distress due to gender identity differing from sex assigned at birth that lasts at least six months and involves two or more of the following:
Gender dysphoria also includes distress that makes it hard to handle work, school, social situations and other parts of daily life.


					Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your gender dysphoria-related health concerns
					Start Here


The purpose of treatment is to ease gender dysphoria. Specific goals for gender dysphoria treatment depend on the person.
If you have gender dysphoria, it's important to find a healthcare professional who has expertise in the care of gender-diverse people. If you need help, you can look online for organizations such as the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH). WPATH offers a search on its website that can find healthcare professionals in your area who work with transgender and gender-diverse people.
Treatment for gender dysphoria can include changes in gender expression, hormone therapy, surgery and supportive behavioral health therapy.
Gender expression involves how gender is shown to the world through the way a person looks or acts. Gender expression may include clothing, mannerisms, communication style and interests, among other things. Changes in gender expression to ease gender dysphoria can involve dressing, speaking and behaving in ways that are more consistent with a person's gender identity.
Medical treatment of gender dysphoria might include:
Specific medical treatment is based on a person's goals, along with an evaluation of the risks and benefits. Treatments also may be based on other conditions a person has. Social and economic issues may play a role in creating a treatment plan too.
Before someone has hormone therapy or surgery to treat gender dysphoria, a healthcare professional does a health assessment. This helps address any medical conditions that might affect gender dysphoria treatment. The evaluation may include:
A behavioral health evaluation also may be done by a healthcare professional with expertise in transgender health. The evaluation may assess:
The goal of behavioral health therapy is to improve mental well-being and quality of life. It isn't intended to change gender identity. Instead, this therapy can help people explore gender concerns and find ways to ease gender dysphoria.
Behavioral health therapy often can help people with gender dysphoria feel comfortable with the way they express gender identity. That may help improve daily life, including school, work and relationships. The treatment also can address other mental health concerns.
Behavioral health therapy might include individual, couples, family and group counseling to help people:
Other ways to ease gender dysphoria might include use of:
Talk with your healthcare professional about whether these steps may be helpful for you.

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
    
Gender dysphoria often can be eased by being in a supportive environment. Social support from family, friends and other loved ones may help prevent depression, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts, anxiety or high-risk behaviors.
Talking to other transgender or gender-diverse people also may help. Ask your healthcare professional about support groups in your area. Some community centers or LGBTQ+ centers have support groups. Online support groups are available too.
Joining an LGBTQ+ organization can help you build community and may offer useful support. Or consider getting involved in other community organizations where you feel comfortable and supported expressing your gender identity.
You may start by seeing your primary healthcare professional. Or you may be referred to a behavioral health professional.
Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.