Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
Home / Healthy Gut / What Happens When Your Liver Enzymes Are High?
One of the most common reasons for a referral to a liver specialist, known as a hepatologist, is elevated liver enzymes found during routine tests. When this happens, it's natural to have questions.
During your annual physical, your primary care team ran typical, routine labs. Scrolling through your online patient portal to view the results, you’re shocked to see some labs flagged as red — your liver enzymes are elevated. Then your health care team sends you a message recommending that you see a liver specialist. What exactly is going on?
One of the most common reasons for a referral to a liver specialist, known as a hepatologist, is elevated liver enzymes found during routine tests. When this happens, it’s natural to have questions.
There are three main lab values that are commonly evaluated in relation to liver health: aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). AST and ALT are markers of liver cell injury. ALP is linked to injury of the bile ducts — a series of tubes that carry the bile produced by the liver cells and empty into the intestines.
Although considered liver injury tests, elevation in any or all of these enzymes does not necessarily mean you have liver damage. These enzymes are produced by other organs as well. For example, AST increases with muscle damage such as in a heart attack or muscle trauma. ALP is also produced by bone and in the placenta during pregnancy. ALT is the most specific enzyme to the liver itself.
Typical ranges can vary between the sexes, based on age and at different laboratories. Generally speaking, the upper limit of typical for AST and ALT for men is 35 to 40 units per liter (U/L) and for women is 25 to 30 U/L. The upper limit of typical for ALP is around 115 U/L for men and 100 U/L for women.
Mild to moderate elevation in liver enzymes often means there is some type of inflammation within the liver. This matters because if the inflammation continues unabated for long enough, you could develop scarring in the liver, known as fibrosis. Stages of fibrosis range from 0 to 4:
It’s best to evaluate liver enzymes early to hopefully prevent any progression of scarring, especially to cirrhosis. Generally, if you have not reached stage 4, fibrosis is reversible.
The most common response we hear after someone is told they have elevated liver enzymes is, “Wait, doctor, I don’t drink heavily. How could I have liver damage?”
This confusion is understandable because alcohol use disorder is a major cause of liver damage. But there are many other causes of elevated liver enzymes, including:
By far, the most common causes are alcohol use disorder and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. There has been a worldwide increase in obesity and its complications, such as diabetes. Alcohol use also has increased during the COVID-19 pandemic, which has added to the prevalence of liver problems over the last decade.
However, it’s also possible that your elevated liver enzymes could be the result of a medication you’re taking. Both prescription and nonprescription medications can cause abnormalities in the liver enzymes.
For this reason, it’s very important to be careful with any nonprescription medications or supplements. Remember that even if supplement ingredients are found in nature, unintended effects and interactions with other medicines are possible. In general, it’s best to check with your health care team prior to starting a new supplement or medication.
In the vast majority of people with mild to moderate liver enzyme elevation who don’t have other symptoms, the liver is not failing.
Liver failure is a distinct medical condition, and it’s divided into two different categories: acute, meaning a rapid onset, and chronic, which means liver failure has been ongoing for years. Both can come with signs and symptoms such as confusion, an inability to form blood clots appropriately, and yellowing of your eyes and skin known as jaundice.
Typically, the initial step is an evaluation beginning with a thorough history and physical exam looking for any signs or symptoms that could relate to chronic liver disease.
Additionally, a number of nonliver causes of liver enzyme elevations should be considered. Most commonly, these include abnormalities of the thyroid or gastrointestinal tract, such as celiac disease or gallstones.
Your health care team will typically order a series of laboratory tests to look for specific causes of elevated liver enzymes and may request an abdominal ultrasound to look for any structural abnormalities of the liver.
If the labs or imaging confirm a diagnosis of underlying liver disease, your health care team will create a specific management plan for you. However, in a small percentage of people, diagnosis will remain elusive despite persistent elevation in liver enzymes. In this group, a liver biopsy may be needed to gather more information.
A test result with elevated liver enzymes is not rare. Your liver is not necessarily failing.
But it is important that you review these results with your health care team or see a hepatologist to ensure there is no advanced scarring present and to identify the underlying cause.
The bottom line: Fibrosis can be reversible!
Discover more Healthy Gut content from articles, podcasts, to videos.
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.
by Paul Cerrato, M.A., John D. Halamka, M.D., M.S.

      Dr. Vargas is an expert in liver transplantation at Mayo Clinic in Arizona.
    

      Dr. Barnhill is an expert in liver transplantation at Mayo Clinic in Arizona.
    
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with the topics of your choice.
by Jonathan Graff-Radford, M.D., Angela M. Lunde, M.A.
by Paul Cerrato, M.A., John D. Halamka, M.D., M.S.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.