A chest X-ray helps detect problems with the heart and lungs. The chest X-ray on the left is typical. The image on the right shows a mass in the right lung.
A chest X-ray helps detect problems with the heart and lungs. The chest X-ray on the left is typical. The image on the right shows a mass in the right lung.
Chest X-rays produce images of your heart, lungs, blood vessels, airways, and the bones of the chest and spine. Chest X-rays can also reveal fluid in or around your lungs or air surrounding a lung.
If you go to a health professional or the emergency room with chest pain, a chest injury or shortness of breath, you will typically get a chest X-ray. The image helps determine whether you have heart problems, a collapsed lung, pneumonia, broken ribs, emphysema, cancer or any of several other conditions.
Some people have a series of chest X-rays done over time to track whether a health problem is getting better or worse.
Chest X-rays are a common type of exam. A chest X-ray is often among the first procedures you'll have if a healthcare professional suspects heart or lung disease. A chest X-ray can also be used to check how you are responding to treatment.
A chest X-ray can reveal many things inside your body, including:
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
You may be concerned about radiation exposure from chest X-rays, especially if you have them regularly. But the amount of radiation from a chest X-ray is low. It's even lower than what you're exposed to through natural sources of radiation in the environment.
Even though the benefits of an X-ray outweigh the risk, you may be given a protective apron if you need multiple images. Tell the X-ray technician if you're pregnant or might be pregnant. The procedure can be performed in a way to protect your belly from the radiation.
Before the chest X-ray, you generally undress from the waist up and wear an exam gown. You'll need to remove jewelry from the waist up, too, since both clothing and jewelry can obscure the X-ray images.
During the procedure, your body is positioned between a machine that produces the X-rays and a plate that creates the image digitally or with X-ray film. You may be asked to move into different positions to take views from both the front and the side of your chest.
During the front view, you stand against the plate, hold your arms up or to the sides and roll your shoulders forward. The X-ray technician may ask you to take a deep breath and hold it for several seconds. Holding your breath after inhaling helps your heart and lungs show up more clearly on the image.
During the side views, you turn and place one shoulder on the plate and raise your hands over your head. Again, you may be asked to take a deep breath and hold it.
Having X-rays taken is generally painless. You don't feel any sensation as the radiation passes through your body. If you have trouble standing, you may be able to have the exam while seated or lying down.
A chest X-ray produces a black-and-white image that shows the organs in your chest. Structures that block radiation appear white, and structures that let radiation through appear black.
Your bones appear white because they are very dense. Your heart also appears as a lighter area. Your lungs are filled with air and block very little radiation, so they appear as darker areas on the images.
A radiologist — a doctor trained to interpret X-rays and other imaging exams — analyzes the images, looking for clues that may suggest if you have heart failure, fluid around your heart, cancer, pneumonia or another condition.
Someone from your healthcare team will discuss the results with you as well as what treatments or other tests or procedures may be necessary.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.