Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
Log in or create an account for a personalized experience based on your selected interests.
Get direct access to the knowledge, wisdom, advice and practical information on healthy aging from Mayo Clinic, one of the world’s foremost health authorities.
of Interest
We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.


We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.

We publish on a diverse range of topics. Find the one that interests you.
Free standard shipping is valid on orders of $45 or more (after promotions and discounts are applied, regular shipping rates do not qualify as part of the $45 or more) shipped to US addresses only. Not valid on previous purchases or when combined with any other promotional offers.
Receive free access to exclusive content, a personalized homepage based on your interests, and a weekly newsletter with topics of your choice.
$8.99 Original price was: $8.99.$4.49Current price is: $4.49.50% OFF
Proceeds are invested into furthering medical research and education at Mayo Clinic.
$8.99 Original price was: $8.99.$4.49Current price is: $4.49.50% OFF
By Hey Gee and Grace Bowden • Edited by Anna Cavallo • Illustrated by Hey Gee
Proceeds are invested into furthering medical research and education at Mayo Clinic.
While Grace waits to see her doctor, she finds an old book that transports her to “once upon a time …”
In the old kingdom, four dragons are making people sick. One young warrior sets out to gather each of the dragons’ stones, which hold the key to protection. The warrior will need her skill, bravery, and her knowledge of the dragons – along with some help from a friend – to succeed on her adventure.
How is getting a vaccination a little like conquering dragons? Find out as Grace discovers life beyond vaccines.
My Life Beyond Vaccines: A Mayo Clinic patient story is part of the My Life Beyond graphic novel series. Created through collaboration among pediatric patients, their doctors, and children’s author and illustrator Hey Gee, each book in the series dives into the mind and imagination of a child patient at Mayo Clinic to explain how children experience illness, challenges, and recovery.
Softcover • 7.68 x 10.63 inches • 36 pages • Mayo Clinic Press Kids • 2022 • ISBN 9781945564079
Guillaume Federighi AKA Hey Gee is a French and American author and illustrator. He began his career in 1998 by exploring the world of street art and graffiti in different European capitals. After moving to New York, Hey Gee developed a reputation for a direct and instantaneous style of graphic design and illustration that brings out unifying ideas, creates distinctive characters, and affects all generations. He is also the owner and creative director of Hey Gee Studio, a full service creative agency based in New York City.
by Guillaume Federighi AKA Hey Gee, Angela C. Mattke, M.D.
Find the answers to some of our most commonly answered questions below. Have a question that isn't answered here? Feel free to visit our Contact Us page.
We are committed to processing your order promptly, and most orders will ship within 24 hours. If you order online, you will receive a shipping confirmation notice with tracking information. Please allow 7-10 days to receive orders within the USA. Canadian and International orders may take 18-21 business days for delivery.
We want you to be completely satisfied with Mayo Clinic Press product. You may return a product within 30 days and receive a prompt refund. To request a return, please email mayoclinicpress@service.mayoclinic.com.
In the event of a temporary stock shortage, we will generally have the product available to ship within 30 days. In the rare occasion that we are unable to meet that deadline, we will not process your order and will notify you when the product becomes available.
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and more!
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.

    Mayo Clinic Press    200 First Street, SW        Rochester,     MN     55905,     USA  
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All Rights Reserved.
We've made some updates to our Privacy Policy. Please take a moment to review.