Swollen lymph nodes most often happen because of infection from bacteria or viruses. Rarely, cancer causes swollen lymph nodes.
The lymph nodes, also called lymph glands, play a vital role in the body being able to fight off infections. They work as filters, trapping viruses, bacteria and other causes of illnesses before they can infect other parts of the body. Common areas for swollen lymph nodes include the neck, under the chin, in the armpits and in the groin.
Sometimes, time and warm compresses may be all that's needed to treat swollen lymph nodes. Sometimes,>If an infection causes swollen lymph nodes, treatment depends on the infection.

      The lymph nodes play a vital role in the body's ability to fight off infections. Common areas for swollen lymph nodes include the neck, under the chin, in the armpits and in the groin.
      

      One of the most common places to find swollen lymph nodes is in the neck. The inset shows three swollen lymph nodes below the lower jaw.
      
The lymph system is a network of organs, vessels and lymph nodes throughout the body. Many lymph nodes are in the head and neck. Lymph nodes there often swell. Swelling can be to the size of a pea or kidney bean or larger.
Swollen lymph nodes are a sign that something is wrong in the body. The nodes might also be tender and painful.
Depending on the cause of the swollen lymph nodes, other symptoms might include:
Some swollen lymph nodes return to their usual size when the condition that's causing them gets better. See your healthcare professional if you're worried or if your swollen lymph nodes:
Seek immediate medical care if you have trouble swallowing or breathing.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Lymph nodes are small, round or bean-shaped bunches of cells. Inside lymph nodes are a mix of types of immune system cells. These cells filter the lymph fluid as it goes through the body and protect the body from invaders.
Lymph nodes are in groups. Each group drains an area of the body. It might be easier to tell if there's swelling in certain areas. These include the lymph nodes in the neck, under the chin, and in the armpits and groin. Where the swollen lymph nodes are might give a clue to the cause of the swelling.
The most common cause of swollen lymph nodes is an infection, usually viral, such as the common cold. Sometimes the cause isn't found.
Other causes of swollen lymph nodes include:
Other possible but rare causes include certain medicines, such as the anti-seizure medicine phenytoin (Dilantin) and medicines that prevent malaria. Silicone breast implants also can cause swollen lymph nodes.
Many conditions increase the risk of swollen lymph nodes. Factors that increase the risk of having these conditions include:
When an infection that causes swollen lymph nodes isn't treated, a collection of pus may form. These are called abscesses. Pus contains fluid, white blood cells, dead tissue, and bacteria or other invaders. An abscess might need to be drained and treated with an antibiotic.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.