Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health condition that's caused by an extremely stressful or terrifying event — either being part of it or witnessing it. Symptoms may include flashbacks, nightmares, severe anxiety and uncontrollable thoughts about the event.
Most people who go through traumatic events may have a hard time adjusting and coping for a short time. But with time and by taking good care of themselves, they usually get better. If the symptoms get worse, last for months or years, and affect their ability to function daily, they may have PTSD.
Getting treatment after PTSD symptoms arise can be very important to ease symptoms and help people function better.
Post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms may start within the first three months after a traumatic event. But sometimes symptoms may not appear until years after the event. These symptoms last more than one month and cause major problems in social or work situations and how well you get along with others. They also can affect your ability to do your usual daily tasks.
Generally, PTSD symptoms are grouped into four types: intrusive memories, avoidance, negative changes in thinking and mood, and changes in physical and emotional reactions. Symptoms can vary over time or vary from person to person.
Symptoms of intrusive memories may include:
Symptoms of negative changes in thinking and mood may include:
Symptoms of changes in physical and emotional reactions, also called arousal symptoms, may include:
For children 6 years old and younger, symptoms also may include:
Over time, PTSD symptoms can vary in how severe they are. You may have more PTSD symptoms when you're generally stressed or when you come across reminders of what you went through, including the same time of year when a past traumatic event happened. For example, you may hear a car backfire and relive combat experiences. Or you may see a report on the news about a sexual assault and feel overcome by memories of your assault.
Talk to your healthcare professional or a mental health professional if you have disturbing thoughts and feelings about a traumatic event for more than a month, especially if they're severe. Also, see a health professional if you're having trouble getting your life back under control. Getting treatment as soon as possible can help prevent PTSD symptoms from getting worse.
If you or someone you know has suicidal thoughts, get help right away:
If you think you may hurt yourself or attempt suicide, call 911 or your local emergency number right away.
If you know someone who's in danger of attempting suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure someone stays with that person for safety. Call 911 or your local emergency number right away. Or, if you can do so safely, take the person to the nearest hospital emergency department.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
You can develop post-traumatic stress disorder when you go through, see or learn about an event involving actual or threatened death, serious injury or sexual assault.
Healthcare professionals aren't sure why some people get PTSD. As with most mental health problems, a mix of factors probably causes it, including:
People of all ages can have post-traumatic stress disorder. But you may be more likely to develop PTSD after a traumatic event if you:
The most common events that can lead to PTSD include:
Many other traumatic events also can lead to PTSD, such as fire, natural disaster, mugging, robbery, plane crash, torture, kidnapping, a life-threatening medical diagnosis, a terrorist attack, and other extreme or life-threatening events.
Post-traumatic stress disorder can disrupt your whole life — your education, job, how well you get along with others, physical health and enjoyment of everyday activities. Having PTSD also may raise your risk of other mental health problems, such as:
After surviving a traumatic event, many people have PTSD-like symptoms at first, such as not being able to stop thinking about what's happened. Fear, anxiety, anger, depression and guilt are all common reactions to trauma. But most people exposed to trauma don't go on to develop PTSD.
Getting timely help and support may prevent usual stress reactions from getting worse and leading to PTSD. This may mean turning to family and friends who will listen and offer comfort. It also may mean seeking out a mental health professional for a brief course of therapy. Some people also may find it helpful to turn to their faith communities.
Support from others also may prevent you from turning to unhealthy coping methods, such as misusing alcohol or drugs.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.