Claudication may go undiagnosed because many people consider the pain to be an unwelcome but typical part of aging. Some people simply reduce their activity level to avoid the pain.
A diagnosis of claudication and peripheral artery disease is based on a review of symptoms, a physical exam, evaluation of the skin on the limbs, and tests to check blood flow.
Some common tests used to diagnose claudication may include:
The goals of treating claudication and peripheral artery disease are to reduce pain and manage the risk factors that contribute to heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease.
Exercise is an important part of claudication treatment. Exercise reduces pain, increases exercise duration, improves vascular health in the affected limbs, and contributes to weight management and an overall improvement in quality of life.
Supervised exercise is recommended for beginning the treatment, but long-term exercise at home is important for ongoing management of claudication.
Your health care provider may prescribe one or more medications to control pain and manage risk factors for cardiovascular disease. For example, medications may be used to manage the following:
Talk to your doctor about medications or supplements that you shouldn't take with your prescribed treatment.
When peripheral artery disease is severe and other treatments don't work, surgery may be required. Options include:
A healthy lifestyle can help improve treatment outcomes and lower risks associated with claudication and peripheral artery disease. Recommended lifestyle changes include the following:
Learning all you can about what's causing your claudication may help you better manage the condition.
Some people also find it helpful to talk with other people who are going through similar experiences. In a support group, you may find encouragement, advice, and maybe even an exercise partner or two. Ask your health care provider if there are any support groups in your area.
You're likely to start by seeing your health care provider. You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases (cardiologist) or a blood vessel (vascular) surgeon.
To make the best of your appointment time, be prepared to answer the following questions:
Your health care provider may ask about the medications you take, including supplements and drugs bought without a prescription. Before your appointment, write down each drug's name, dosage, reason for taking it and the name of the prescribing provider. Bring the list with you to your appointment.
Other strategies to help you use your appointment time well include the following:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.