Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
High blood pressure is called hypertension. This blood pressure chart can help you figure out if your blood pressure is at a healthy level. It also can help you understand if you need to take some steps to improve your numbers.
Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). A blood pressure reading has two numbers.
The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association divide blood pressure into four general categories. Ideal blood pressure is categorized as normal. Increased blood pressure may be categorized as elevated, stage 1 or stage 2 depending on the specific numbers.
A diagnosis of high blood pressure is usually based on the average of two or more readings taken on separate visits. The first time your blood pressure is checked, it should be measured in both arms to see if there is a difference. After that, the arm with the higher reading should be used. An accurate reading is important. It helps your healthcare team decide what kind of treatment you may need, if any.
Here's a look at the four blood pressure categories and what they mean for you. If your top and bottom numbers fall into two different categories, your correct blood pressure category is the higher category. For example, if your blood pressure reading is 125/85 mm Hg, you have stage 1 hypertension.
Sources: American College of Cardiology; American Heart Association
*Ranges may be lower for children and teenagers. Talk to your child's care provider if you're concerned that your child has high blood pressure.
†These recommendations address high blood pressure as a single health condition. If you also have heart disease, diabetes, chronic kidney disease or certain other conditions, you may need to treat your blood pressure more aggressively.
A blood pressure measurement over 180/120 mm Hg is called a hypertensive emergency or crisis. Seek emergency medical help for anyone with these blood pressure numbers.
Your healthcare team can tell you what the best blood pressure goal is for you.
If your blood pressure is OK, following a healthy lifestyle may prevent or delay high blood pressure or other health problems.
If your blood pressure is high, you may need lifestyle changes and medicines to control it and reduce the risk of complications, such as heart attacks and strokes.
There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.