Chagas (CHAH-gus) disease is an illness caused infection with the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. The parasite is found in the feces of the triatomine bug. These bugs also are called reduviid. They may also be known as "kissing bugs" because they tend to bite people's faces.
Chagas disease is common in South America, Central America and Mexico. Rarely, Chagas disease has been found in the southern United States.
Also called American trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease can infect anyone. Untreated, Chagas disease can cause serious heart and digestive problems.
During the first phase of infection, treatment of Chagas disease aims to kill the parasite. Later, it's no longer possible to kill the parasite. Treatment in this later phase is about managing symptoms. There also are ways to prevent infection.
Chagas disease can cause a sudden, brief illness. This type of illness is known as acute. Or it can become a long-lasting, chronic condition. Both stages can be free of symptoms. Or there can be life-threatening symptoms in either phase.
The acute phase of Chagas disease lasts for weeks or months. It often has no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they're mostly mild. They may include:
Symptoms that come on during the acute phase most often go away on their own. But if the infection isn't treated, Chagas disease stays in the body. Sometimes it moves to the chronic phase.
Symptoms of the chronic phase of Chagas disease may appear 10 to 20 years after the infection starts. Or there might be no symptoms. In severe cases, Chagas disease symptoms may include:
See your healthcare professional if you have been in an area where Chagas disease is widespread and you have symptoms of the condition.
The cause of Chagas disease is the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. The parasite spreads from an insect known as the triatomine bug, also called the "kissing bug." The parasite can infect these insects when they swallow blood from an animal that is infected with the parasite.
Triatomine bugs live mainly in mud, thatch or adobe huts in Mexico, South America and Central America. They hide in crevices in the walls or roof during the day and come out at night. The bugs often feed on people while they sleep.
Infected bugs poop, called defecate, after feeding. The stool leaves parasites on the skin. The parasites can then enter the body through the eyes, mouth, a cut or scratch, or the wound from the bug's bite.
Scratching or rubbing the bite site, which often happens during sleep, helps the parasites enter the body. Once in the body, the parasites multiply and spread.
Chagas disease doesn't spread from being near an infected person. But the infection can come from:
The following can increase the risk of getting Chagas disease:
It's rare for travelers to the at-risk areas in South America, Central America and Mexico to catch Chagas disease. That's because travelers tend to stay in buildings, such as hotels, that are less likely to have Triatomine bugs. Triatomine bugs are most often found in places made from mud, adobe or thatch. But travelers should not eat salads, uncooked vegetables and unpeeled fruits.
If Chagas disease moves to the long-lasting, called chronic, phase, there can be serious heart or digestive complications. These may include:
If you live in a high-risk area for Chagas disease, these steps can help prevent infection:
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.
© 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.